Growth, Development, and Behavior PART Chapter 19 Developmental and Behavioral Theories Margo Candelaria and Susan Feigelman The field of pediatrics is dedicated to optimizing the growth and development of each child. Pediatricians require knowledge of nor- mal growth, development, and behavior to effectively monitor chil- dren's progress, identify delays or abnormalities in development, help obtain needed services, and counsel parents and caretakers. To alter factors that increase or decrease risk and resilience, pediatricians need to understand how biologic and social forces interact within the par- ent-child relationship, within the family, and between the family and the larger society. Growth is an indicator of overall well-being, status of chronic disease, and interpersonal and psychologic stress. By monitor- ing children and families over time, pediatricians are uniquely situated to observe the interrelationships between physical growth and cogni- tive, motor, and emotional development. Observation is enhanced by familiarity with developmental and behavioral theories that inform one about typical patterns of development and provide guidance for prevention or intervention for behavior problems. Familiarity with theories of health behavior may assist clinicians in guiding patients and families in disease management and wellness care. BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL MODEL AND ECOBIODEVELOPMENTAL FRAMEWORK: MODELS OF DEVELOPMENT The medical model presumes that a patient presents with signs and symptoms and a physician focuses on diagnosing and treating diseases of the body. This model neglects the social and psychologic aspect of a person who exists in the larger realm of the family and society. In the biopsychosocial model, societal and community systems are simulta- neously considered along with more proximal systems that make up the person and the person's environment (Fig. 19.1). A patient's symp- toms are examined and explained in the context of the patient's exis- tence. This multidimensional model can be used to understand health and both acute and chronic disease, and this model has been increas- ingly used to develop care models over the past few decades. With the advances in neurology, genomics (including epigenetics), molecular biology, and the social sciences, a broader model, the eco- biodevelopmental framework, has emerged. This framework empha- sizes how the ecology of childhood (social and physical environments) interacts with biologic processes to determine outcomes and life tra- jectories. Early influences, particularly those producing toxic levels of stress, affect the individual through their impact on the body's stress response systems, brain development, and modification of gene expres- sion. Epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation and histone acetyla- tion, may be influenced by early life experiences (the environment) and impact gene expression without changing the DNA sequence. These changes can produce long-lasting effects on the health and well-being of the individual and may be passed on to future generations (Fig. 19.2). Critical to learning and remembering (and therefore development) is neuronal plasticity, which permits the central nervous system to reorganize neuronal networks in response to environmental stimula- tion, both positive and negative. An overproduction of neuronal pre- cursors eventually leads to about 100 billion neurons in the adult brain. Each neuron develops on average 15,000 synapses by 3 years of age. Dur- ing early childhood, synapses in frequently used pathways are preserved, whereas less-used ones atrophy, a process termed pruning. Changes in the strength and number of synapses and reorganization of neuronal circuits also play important roles in brain plasticity. Increases or decreases in syn- aptic activity result in persistent increases or decreases in synaptic strength. Thus experience (environment) has a direct effect on the physical and therefore functional properties of the brain. Children with different talents and temperaments (already a combination of genetics and environment) further elicit different stimuli from their varying environments. Periods of rapid development generally correlate with periods of great changes in synaptic numbers in relevant areas of the brain. Accordingly, sensory deprivation during the time when synaptic changes should be occurring has profound effects. The effects of stra- bismus leading to amblyopia occur quickly during early childhood; patching the eye with good vision to reverse amblyopia is less effective in late childhood (see Chapter 663). Early experience is particularly important because learning proceeds more efficiently along established synaptic pathways. However, some plasticity of the brain continues into adolescence, with further development of the prefrontal cortex, which is important in decision-making, future planning, and emotional con- trol; neurogenesis persists in adulthood in certain areas of the brain. Early traumatic experiences modify the expression of stress media- tors (in particular the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis) and neu- rotransmitters, leading to changes in brain connectivity and function. These effects may be persistent, leading to alterations and dysfunc- tion in the stress response throughout life. Chronic stress has negative eftects on cognitive functions, including memory and emotional regu- lation. Positive and negative experiences do not determine the ultimate outcome but shift the probabilities by influencing the child's ability to respond adaptively to future stimuli. There is increasing evidence that positive experiences and relation- ships can buffer the impact of negative or traumatic experience and toxic stress. In fact, there is a recent call for pediatrics to recognize and promote relational health as a protective factor. By promoting positive relationships, labeled safe, stable, and nurturing relationships (SSNRs) within primary care, healthcare providers can work with families to build relational health, thereby combatting the deleterious effects of toxic stress and promoting resilience. Pediatric care can do this by employing a public health approach, partnering with families and com- munities, to build healthy relationships by connecting to and integrat- ing with primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention programs. This can include embedding interventions within primary care and creating robust referral networks to connect families to needed services. Biologic Influences Biologic inches on declapsmine include genetics in wish exposure morbidities plus increased rates of subsequent adult-onset obesity, coro- nary heart disease, stroke, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes), postnatal illnesses, exposure to hazardous substances, and maturation. Adoption and twin studies consistently show that heredity accounts for approxi- mately 40% of the variance in IQ and in other personality traits, such as sociability and desire for novelty, whereas shared environment accounts for another 50%. The negative effects on development of prenatal expo- sure to teratogens, such as mercury and alcohol, and of postnatal insults, such as meningitis and traumatic brain injury, have been extensively stud- ied (see Chapters 117, 122, and 146). Any chronic illness can affect growth and development, either directly or through changes in factors such as nutrition, parenting, school attendance, peer interactions, or self-esteem. follow similar motor developmental sequences despite great variability in child-rearing practices. The attainment of skills such as the use of complex sentences is less tightly bound to a 

Biosphere Society-Nation Culture-Subculture Community Family Two person Person Nervous system Organ/Organ systems Tissue Cell Organelle Molecule Fig. 19.1 Continuum and hierarchy of natural systems in the biopsy- chosocial model. (From Engel GL. The clinical application of the biopsy- chosocial model. Am J Psychiatry. 1980;137:535-544.) maturational schedule. Maturational changes also generate behavioral challenges at predictable times. Decrements in growth rate and sleep requirements around 2 years of age often generate concern about poor appetite and refusal to nap. Although it is possible to accelerate many developmental milestones (toilet training a 12 month old or teaching a 3 year old to read), the long-term benefits of such precocious accomplish- ments are questionable. In addition to physical changes in size, body proportions, and strength, maturation brings about hormonal changes. Sexual differen- tiation, both somatic and neurologic, begins in utero. Both stress and reproductive hormones affect brain development as well as behavior throughout development. Steroid production by the fetal gonads leads to differences in brain structures between males and females. Temperament describes the stable, early-appearing individual varia- tions in behavioral dimensions, including emotionality (crying, laugh- ing, sulking), activity level, attention, sociability, and persistence. The classic theory proposes nine dimensions of temperament (Table 19.1). These characteristics lead to three common constellations: (1) the easy, highly adaptable child, who has regular biologic cycles; (2) the difficult child, who is inflexible, moody, and easily frustrated; and (3) the slow- to-warm-up child, who needs extra time to adapt to new circumstances. Various combinations of these clusters also occur. Temperament has long been described as biologic or "inherited." Monozygotic twins are rated by their parents as temperamentally similar more often than are dizygotic twins. Estimates of heritability suggest that genetic differences account for 20-60% of the variability of temperament within a population. The remainder of the variance is attributed to the child's environment. Mater- nal prenatal stress and anxiety is associated with child temperament, possibly through stress hormones. However, certain polymorphisms of specific genes moderate the influence of maternal stress on infant temper- ament. Children who are easily frustrated, fearful, or irritable may elicit negative parental reactions, making these children even more susceptible to negative parenting behaviors and to poor adjustment to adversity. Lon- gitudinal twin studies of adult personality indicate that changes in per- sonality over time largely result from dissimilar environmental influences, whereas stability of temperament appears to result from genetic factors. The concept of temperament can help parents understand and accept the characteristics of their children without feeling responsible for hav- ing caused them. Children who have difficulty adjusting to change Chapter 19 • Developmental and Behavioral Theories 137 may have behavior problems when a new baby arrives or at the time of school entry. In addition, pointing out the child's temperament may allow for adjustment in parenting styles. Behavioral and emotional problems may develop when the temperamental characteristics of chil- dren and parents are in conflict. If parents who keep an irregular sched- ule have a child who is not readily adaptable, behavioral difficulties are more likely than if the child has parents who have predictable routines. Psychologic Influences: Attachment and Contingency The influence of the child-rearing environment dominates most current models of development. Infants in hospitals and orphanages, devoid of opportunities for attachment, have severe developmental deficits. Attachment refers to a biologically determined tendency of a young child to seek proximity to the parent during times of stress and to the relationship that allows securely attached children to use their parents to reestablish a sense of well-being after a stressful experience. Insecure attachment may be predictive of later behavioral and learning problems. At all stages of development, children progress optimally when they have adult caregivers who pay attention to their verbal and nonverbal cues and respond accordingly. In early infancy, such contingent responsiveness to signs of overarousal or underarousal helps maintain infants in a state of quiet alertness and fosters autonomic self-regulation. Consistent contin- gent responses (reinforcement depending on the behavior of the other) to nonverbal gestures create the groundwork for the shared attention and reciprocity that are critical for later language and social development. Social Factors: Family Systems and the Ecologic Model Contemporary models of child development recognize the critical impor- tance of influences outside the mother-child dyad. Fathers play critical roles, both in their direct relationships with their children and in sup- porting mothers. As traditional nuclear families become less dominant. the influence of other family members and caregivers (grandparents, foster and adoptive parents, same-sex partners) becomes increasingly important. Furthermore, the presence of nurturing and stable caregivers, in or out of the nuclear family, can help to buffer the impact of a parent who may struggle with mental illness, substance use, or other afflictions. As children grow within their larger ecosystem, it is important to recog- nize and include all relevant caregivers in the child's care. Families function as systems, with internal and external bound- aries, subsystems, roles, and rules for interaction. In families with rigidly dehned parental subsystems, children may be denied any decision-making, exacerbating rebelliousness. In families with poorly defined parent-child boundaries, children may be required to take on responsibilities beyond their years or may be recruited to play a spousal role. Family systems theory recognizes that individuals within systems adopt implicit roles. Although birth order does not have long-term effects on personality development, within families the members take on different roles. One child may be the troublemaker, whereas another is the negotiator and another is quiet. Changes in one person's behav- ior aftects every other member of the system; roles shift until a new equilibrium is found. The birth of a new child, attainment of develop- mental milestones such as independent walking, the onset of nighttime fears, diagnosis of a chronic illness, or death of a family member are all changes that require renegotiation of roles within the family and have the potential for healthy adaptation or dysfunction. The family system, in turn, functions within the larger systems of extended family, subculture, culture, and society. Bronfenbrenner's ecologic model depicts these relationships as concentric circles, with the parent-child dyad at the center (with associated risks and protec- tive factors) and the larger society at the periphery. Changes at any level are reflected in the levels above and below. Furthermore, these systems and their interactions change over time, with some influences being persistent and chronic and others being temporary. The shift from an industrial economy to one based on service and information and the influence of systemic racism are examples of how society has profound effects on families and children. Understanding the child's greater eco- system is important to understand their family and the context of their 

138 Part II • Growth, Development, and Behavior An Ecobiodevelopmental Framework for Early Childhood Policies and Programs Policy and Program Levers for Innovation Primary health care Public health Childcare and early education Child welfare Early intervention Family economic stability Community development Private sector actions Caregiver and Community Capacities Time and commitment Financial, psychologic, and institutional resources Skills and knowledge Foundations of Healthy Development Stable, responsive relationships Safe, supportive environments Appropriate Biology of Health and Development Cumulative over time Gene- environment interaction Physiologic adaptations or disruptions Embedded during sensitive periods Outcomes in Lifelong Well-Being Health-related behaviors Educational achievemem productivity Physical and mental health Ecology Biology Health and development Fig. 19.2 Ecobiodevelopmental framework for early childhood policies and programs. (Adapted from Center on the Developing Child. The toun- dations of lifelong health are built in early childhood. 2010; Available at: http://www.developingchild.harvard.edu.) Table 19.1 CHARACTERISTIC Activity level Temperamental Characteristics: Descriptions and Examples DESCRIPTION Amount of gross motor movement EXAMPLES* "She's constantly on the move." "He would rather sit still than run Rhythmicity Regularity of biologic cycles Approach and withdrawal Initial response to new stimuli Adaptability Threshold of responsiveness Intensity of reaction Ease of adaptation to novel stimulus Intensity of stimuli needed to evoke a response (e.g., touch, sound, light) Energy level of response Quality of mood Distractibility Usual disposition (e.g., pleasant, glum) How easily diverted from ongoing activity Attention span and persistence How long a child pays attention and sticks with difficult tasks *Typical statements of parents, reflecting the range for each characteristic from very little to very much. Based on data from Chess S, Thomas A. Temperament in Clinical Practice. New York: Guilford; 1986. around." "Hat never hungy, at the same time each day: " You could set a "She refects every new food at first. " He sleeps Well in any "Changes upset him." "She adjusts to new people quickly." "He notices all the lumps in his food and objects to them." "She will eat anything, wear anything, do anything." "She shouts when she is happy and wails when she is sad." "He never cries much." "He does not laugh much." "It seems like she is always happy." "She is distracted at mealtime when other children are nearby." "He doesn't even hear me when he is playing." "He goes from toy to toy every minute." "She will keep at a puzzle until she has mastered it." growth. Factors such as poverty, systemic racism, access to education, transportation, food, housing, parental employment, and local support systems are influential factors in a child's well-being. Whenever pos- sible, identifying community supports and assets for families can help promote health and development. Unifying Concepts: The Transactional Model, Risk, and Resilience The transactional model proposes that a child's status at any point in time is a function of the interaction between biologic and social influences. The influences are bidirectional: biologic factors, such as temperament and health status, affect the child-rearing environ- ment and are affected by it. A premature infant may cry little and sleep for long periods; the infant's depressed parent may welcome this behavior, setting up a cycle that leads to poor nutrition and inadequate growth. The child's failure to thrive may reinforce the parent's sense of failure as a parent. At a later stage, impulsivity and inattention associated with early, prolonged undernutrition may lead to aggressive behavior. The cause of the aggression in this case is not the prematurity, the undernutrition, or the mater- nal depression, but the interaction of all these factors (Fig. 19.3). Conversely, children with biologic risk factors may nevertheless do 

Chapter 19 • Developmental and Behavioral Theories 139 Biologic Mechanisms Genetics, in utero influences on fetal development Maternal Depression Psychosocial Mechanisms Attachment, child discipline, modeling, family functioning Child Adjustment Problems Fig. 19.3 Theoretical model of mutual influences on maternal depression and child adjustment. (From Elgar FJ, McGrath PJ, Waschbusch DA, et al. Mutual influenc- es on maternal depression and child adjustment prob- lems, Clin Psychol Rev 2004;24:441-459.) Social Capital Income, social resources well developmentally if the child-rearing environment is support- ive. Premature infants with electroencephalographic evidence of neurologic immaturity may be at increased risk for cognitive delay. When parent-child interactions are optimal, risk of developmental disability is reduced. An estimate of developmental risk can begin with risk factors, such as low income, low literacy, and lack of neighborhood resources. Stress and anxiety in pregnancy are associated with cognitive, behav- ioral, and emotional problems in the child. Early stress may have effects on aging mediated by shortening of telomere length, a link to health disparities. Risk for negative outcomes over time increases exponentially as a result of declining plasticity and accumulation of risk factors (both behavioral and environmental). Interventions are most effective in young children; over time, risk increases as the abil- ity to change decreases. Children growing up in poverty experience multiple levels of developmental risk: increased exposure to biologic risk factors, such as environmental lead and inadequate nutrition; lack of stimu- lation in the home; and decreased access to interventional educa- tion and therapeutic experiences. As they respond by withdrawal or acting out, they further discourage positive stimulation from those around them. Children of adolescent mothers are also at risk. When early intervention programs provide timely, intensive, comprehen- sive, and prolonged services, at-risk children show marked and sustained upswings in their developmental trajectory. Early iden- tification of children at developmental risk, along with early inter- vention to support parenting, is critically important (see Chapter 20). Promoting relational health and identifying supportive com- munity resources and interventions can buffer the negative impact of environmental risk factors. Children can have appropriate developmental trajectories despite childhood trauma. Resilience is the ability to withstand, adapt to, and recover from adversities. There are several modifiable resilience fac- tors: a positive appraisal or outlook and good executive functioning (see Chapter 49); nurturing parenting; good maternal mental health, self-care skills, and consistent household routines; and an under- standing of trauma. The personal histories of children who overcome poverty often include at least one trusted adult (parent, grandparent, teacher) with whom the child has a special, supportive, close relation- ship. Pediatric providers are positioned to target and bolster resil- ience in their patients and families. Developmental Domains and Theories of Emotion and Cognition Child development can also be tracked by the child's developmental progress in particular domains, such as gross motor, fine motor, social, emotional, language, and cognition. Within each of these catego- ries are developmental sequences of changes leading up to particular attainments. Development in the gross motor domain, from rolling to creeping to independent walking, are clear. Others, such as the line leading to the development of conscience, are subtler. The concept of a developmental line implies that a child passes through successive stages. Several developmental theories are based on stages as qualitatively different epochs in the development of emotion and cognition (Table 19.2). In contrast, behavioral theories rely less on qualitative change and more on the gradual modification of behavior and accumulation of competence. Psychoanalytic Theories At the core of Freudian theory is the idea of body-centered (or broadly, "sexual") drives; the emotional health of both the child and the adult depends on adequate resolution of conflicts brought about by these drives. Although Freudian ideas have been challenged, they opened the door to subsequent theories of development. Erikson recast Freud's stages in terms of the emerging personal- ity (see Table 19.2). The child's sense of basic trust develops through the successful negotiation of infantile needs. As children progress through these psychosocial stages, different issues become salient. It is predictable that a toddler will be preoccupied with establishing a sense of autonomy, whereas a late adolescent may be more focused on establishing meaningful relationships and an occupational identity. Erikson recognized that these stages arise in the context of Western European societal expectations; in other cultures, the salient issues may be quite different. Erikson's work calls attention to the intrapersonal challenges fac- ing children at different ages in a way that facilitates professional intervention. Knowing that the salient issue for school-age children is industry vs inferiority, pediatricians inquire about a child's expe- riences of mastery and failure and (if necessary) suggest ways to ensure adequate successes. Cognitive Theories Cognitive development is best understood through the work of Piaget. A central tenet of Piaget's work is that cognition changes in quality, not just quantity (see Table 19.2). During the sensorimo- tor stage, an infant's thinking is tied to immediate sensations and a child's ability to manipulate objects. The concept of "in" is embod- ied in a child's act of putting a block into a cup. With the arrival of language, the nature of thinking changes dramatically; symbols increasingly take the place of objects and actions. Piaget described how children actively construct knowledge for themselves through the linked processes of assimilation (taking in new experiences according to existing schemata) and accommodation (creating new patterns of understanding to adapt to new information). In this way, children are continually and actively reorganizing cogni- tive processes. There have been challenges to some of the Piaget's basic con- cepts. Children may reach the stages at variable ages. Of undeniable 

140 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 19.2 Classic Developmental Stage Theories INFANCY (0-1 YR) TODDLERHOOD (2-3 YR) Freud: psychosexual Erikson: psychosocial Piaget: cognitive Kohlberg: moral Oral Basic trust vs mistrust Sensorimotor Anal Autonomy vs shame and doubt Sensorimotor Preconventional: avoid punishment/obtain rewards (stages 1 and 2) PRESCHOOL (3-6 YR) Phallic/oedipal Initiative vs guilt Preoperational Conventional: conformity (stage 3) SCHOOL AGE (6-12 YR) Latency Industry vs inferiority Concrete operations Conventional: law and order (stage 4) ADOLESCENCE (12-20 YR) Genital Identity vs role diffusion Formal operations Postconventional: moral principles importance is Piaget's focus on cognition as a subject of empiri- cal study, the universality of the progression of cognitive stages, and the image of a child as actively and creatively interpreting the world. Piaget's work is of special importance to pediatricians for three reasons: (1) Piaget's observations provide insight into many puzzling behaviors of infancy, such as the common exacerbation of sleep problems at 9 and 18 months of age; (2) Piaget's observa- tions often lend themselves to quick replication in the office, with little special equipment; and (3) open-ended questioning, based on Piaget's work, can provide insights into children's understanding of illness and hospitalization. However, other studies have found that even young children and infants are "natural scientists" and able to integrate new informa- tion through experimentation. Young children's learning is highly similar to the scientific thought process, including inductive rea- soning, making predictions, and hypothesis testing. Hypotheses and conclusions about the world are constantly being revised based on the child's experience. When children are faced with evidence that conflicts with expected outcomes (expectancy violation), they are motivated to explore and resolve ambiguities. Children can alter their beliefs when given new evidence. That children utilize proba- bilistic models and exploration to resolve unexpected outcomes has strong implications for the advancement of educational theory. Based on cognitive development, Kohlberg developed a theory of moral development in six stages, from early childhood through adulthood. Preschoolers' earliest sense of right and wrong is ego- centric, motivated by externally applied controls. In later stages, children perceive equality, fairness, and reciprocity in their under- standing of interpersonal interactions through perspective taking. Most youth will reach stage 4, conventional morality, by mid-to late adolescence. The basic theory has been modified to distinguish morality from social conventions. Whereas moral thinking consid- ers interpersonal interactions, justice, and human welfare, social conventions are the agreed-on standards of behavior particular to a social or cultural group. Within each stage of development, children are guided by the basic precepts of moral behavior, but they also may take into account local standards, such as dress code, class- room behavior, and dating expectations. There is a broader under- standing of moral development of even young infants and children theorizing an innate capacity to relate to others. Moral development can be found in very young infants, toddlers, and preschoolers who have a concept of self in relation to others, empathy and caring for others, and may incorporate their cultural context in a way that influences how and when moral development occurs. Behavioral Theory This theoretical perspective distinguishes itself by its lack of con- cern with a child's inner experience. Its focus is on observable behaviors and measurable factors that either increase or decrease the frequency with which these behaviors occur. No stages are implied; children, adults, and indeed animals all respond in the same way. In its simplest form, the behaviorist orientation asserts that behaviors that are reinforced occur more frequently; behaviors that are punished or ignored occur less frequently. Reinforcement may be further divided into positive reinforcement, when a reward or attention increases the chance of a behavior occurring, and nega- tive reinforcement, when removal of an aversive stimulus increases the frequency of the behavior. A teacher who allows students who complete the homework Monday through Thursday not to have an assignment on Friday is using negative reinforcement to motivate homework completion during the week. The strengths of behavioral theory are its simplicity, wide applicabil- ity, and conduciveness to scientific verification. A behavioral approach lends itself to interventions for various common problems, such as temper tantrums, aggressive preschool behavior, and eating disorders, in which behaviors are broken down into discrete units. In cognitively limited chil- dren and children with autism spectrum disorder, behavioral interventions using applied behavior analysis approaches have demonstrated the abil- ity to teach new, complex behaviors. Applied behavior analysis has been particularly useful in the treatment of early-diagnosed autism spectrum disorder (see Chapter 58). However, when misbehavior is symptomatic of an underlying emotional, perceptual, or family problem, an exclusive reliance on behavior therapy risks leaving the cause untreated. Behavioral approaches can be taught to parents for application at home. Theories Used in Behavioral Interventions An increasing number of programs or interventions (within and outside the physician's office) are designed to influence health behaviors; some of these models are based on behavioral or cog- nitive theory or may have attributes of both. The most commonly employed models are the Health Belief Model, Theory of Reasoned Action, Theory of Planned Behavior, Social Cognitive Theory, and Transtheoretical Model, also known as Stages of Change Theory (see Chapter 18). Pediatricians should be aware of these models and their similarities and differences (Table 19.3). Interventions based on these theories have been designed for children and adolescents in community, clinic, and hospital-based settings. Motivational interviewing (MI) is a technique often used in clinical settings to bring about behavior change (Chapter 18). Briefly, the goal is to enhance an individual's motivation to change behavior by explor- ing and overcoming ambivalence. The therapist is a partner rather than an authority figure and recognizes that, ultimately, the patient has control over his or her choices. Pediatric providers can learn brief MI techniques. Statistics Used in Describing Growth and Development See Chapter 27. In everyday use, the term normal is synonymous with healthy. In a statistical sense, normal means that a set of values generates a 

Chapter 19 • Developmental and Behavioral Theories 141 Table 19.3 Similar or Identical Elements Within Six Theories of Health Behavior GENERAL TENET OF "ENGAGING IN THE BEHAVIOR IS CONCEPT LIKELY IF..." HEALTH BELIEF MODEL THEORY OF THEORY OF REASONED PLANNED ACTION BEHAVIOR SOCIAL COGNITIVE THEORY TRANS- THEORETICAL MODEL (STAGES OF CHANGE) SOCIAL NORMS THEORY ATTITUDINAL BELIEFS Appraisal of Positive aspects positive/ outweigh negative negative aspects Benefits vs. Behavioral beliefs and barriers; health motive eviles latof those Outcome expectation; expectancies Pros, cons (decision balance) Perceptions of peer attitudes and behaviors aspects of the behavior and expected outcome SELF-EFFICACY/BELIEF ABOUT CONTROL OVER THE BEHAVIOR Belief in one's Belief that one Self-efficacy ability to can perform the perform the behavior Perceived behavioral control Self-efficacy Self-efficacy/ temptation - conidience NORMATIVE AND NORM-RELATED BELIEFS AND ACTIVITIES Belief that Belief that others Cues from Social support others are support the media, supportive of behavior change friends (subjective norms) the behavior Belief that others are engaging in Other people are engaging in the behavior - Social environment; modeling the behavior Responses that increase or Receives positive reinforcement Cues to action - Reinforcement decrease the likelihood of Helping relationships Cornges of Social liberation (process of change) Reinforcement management/ stimulus control Misalations perceived Mispactuations perceived engaging in Change in perceptions through media; social messaging the behavior; reminders RISK-RELATED BELIEFS AND EMOTIONAL RESPONSES Belief that one Belief that one is at Perceived - is at risk if not risk for negative susceptibility/ - engaging in outcome or disease severity the behavior; (perceived consequences threat) nay be severe Emotional coping Dramatic relief - responses/ (process of expectancies change) about environmental cues INTENTION/COMMITMENT/PLANNING Intending or Forms strong Behavioral intentions planning to intentions to Self-control/ self-regulation benariothe engage in the seeiraration behavior/makes a (process of setting goals commitment change) Adapted from Noar SM, Zimmerman RS. Health behavior theory and cumulative knowledge regarding health behaviors: are we moving in the right direction? Health Educ Res. 2005; 20:275-290, Table 1. Table 19.4 Relationship Between Standard Deviation (SD) and Normal Range for Normally Distributed Quantities PROBABILITY OF A "NORMAL" MEASUREMENT DEVIATING OBSERVATIONS INCLUDED IN THE NORMAL RANGE FROM THE MEAN BY THIS AMOUNT SD % SD % +1| 68.3 16.0 +2 95.4 +3 99.7 ≥2 ≥3 0.13 

142 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Growth Chart 95 50 Height (cm) 95 50 5 Chapter 20 Positive Parenting and Support Rebecca A. Baum and Samantha Schilling 3 4 Age (yr) 5 Height (cm) 89 94.9 102.0 Frequency distribution for 3 yr olds Percentile 5 50 95 Fig. 19.4 Relationship between percentile lines on the growth curve and frequency distributions of height at different ages. normal (bell-shaped or gaussian) distribution. This is the case with anthropometric quantities, such as height and weight, and with many developmental measures, such as IQ. For a normally distrib- uted measurement, a histogram with the quantity (height, age) on the x axis and the frequency (the number of children of that height, or the number who stand on their own at that age) on the y axis gen- erates a bell-shaped curve. In an ideal bell-shaped curve, the peak corresponds to the arithmetic mean (average) of the sample, as well as to the median and the mode. The median is the value above and below which 50% of the observations lie; the mode is the value with the highest number of observations. Distributions are termed skewed if the mean, median, and mode are not the same number. The extent to which observed values cluster near the mean deter- mines the width of the bell and can be described mathematically by the standard deviation (SD). In the ideal normal curve, a range of values extending from 1 SD below the mean to 1 SD above the mean includes approximately 68% of the values, and each "tail" above and below that range contains 16% of the values. A range encompass- ing +2 SD includes 95% of the values (with the upper and lower tails each comprising approximately 2.5% of the values), and +3 SD encompasses 99.7% of the values (Table 19.4 and Fig. 19.4). For any single measurement, its distance away from the mean can be expressed in terms of the number of SDs (also called a z score); one can then consult a table of the normal distribution to find out what percentage of measurements fall within that distance from the mean. Software to convert anthropometric data into z scores for epidemiologic purposes is available. A measurement that falls "outside the normal range" (arbitrarily defined as 2, or sometimes 3, SDs on either side of the mean) is atypical, but not necessarily indicative of illness. The further a measurement (height, weight, IQ) falls from the mean, the greater is the probability that it repre- sents not simply normal variation, but rather a different, potentially pathologic condition. Another way of relating an individual to a group uses percentiles. The percentile is the percentage of individuals in the group who have achieved a certain measured quantity (e.g., height of 95 cm) or a devel- opmental milestone (e.g., walking independently). For anthropometric data, the percentile cutoffs can be calculated from the mean and SD. The 5th, 10th, and 25th percentiles correspond to -1.65 SD, - 1.3 SD, and -0.7 SD, respectively. Figure 19.4 demonstrates how frequency dis- tributions of a particular parameter (height) at different ages relate to the percentile lines on the growth curve. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. No single force may be more important to a child's development than the environment in which they are raised. Many factors, both posi- tive and negative, contribute to this environment. Parenting practices provide a foundation to promote healthy child development, protect against adverse outcomes, and foster resilience. The term positive par- enting describes an approach to parenting that achieves these goals. THE IMPORTANCE OF PARENTING Interactions between parents and their children provide stimulation that promotes the development of language, early cognitive skills, and school readiness. Less frequent participation in interactive parenting practices, such as reading aloud to children, eating family meals, and participating in family outings, predicts an increased risk of develop- mental delay in low-income families. Interventions that increase par- ents' reading to children promote positive developmental outcomes such as early language and literacy development. The affective nature of the parent-child interaction is important for both cognitive and social emotional development. Persistent maternal depression has been linked to decreases in child IQ scores at school entry. Early exposure to positive parenting has been associated with lower rates of childhood depression, risky behavior, delinquency, inju- ries, behavior problems, and bullying, and with increased likelihood of empathy and prosocial behavior. The beneficial effects of early mater- nal sensitivity on social competence have been found to persist into adulthood, contributing to the growing evidence that early parent- child interactions have a long-term impact. Positive parenting practices, such as using a warm, supportive approach during conflict, and negative practices, such as maternal aggression, have been associated with MRI changes in adolescent brain development in males. Animal models have been used to dem- onstrate the detrimental effects of stressful early life experiences. Offspring raised in these environments were more likely to exhibit fearful behavior and had differences in brain architecture and in epigenetic changes that alter gene expression. Importantly in these animal models, increased maternal nurturing could protect against these changes. THE ROLE OF THE FAMILY Parenting occurs in the context of the family, and yet a "one size fits all" approach to understanding families does not suffice. To understand the influence of the family environment on parenting practices, it is important to appreciate the evolving diversity among U.S. families with respect to culture, race/ethnicity, and family makeup. The U.S. popu- lation continues to become more racially/ethnically diverse (61.1% in 2020 vs 54.9% in 2010). Over the last several decades, the percentage of children raised in single-parent homes has continued to grow to nearly 25% in 2020, up from 9% in 1960. It is also important to appreciate that many families face disparities in health and developmental outcomes related to racism and other forms of discrimination that may occur on the basis of religion, sexuality/gender, disability, and socioeconomic status among other factors. For many children these factors interact to further increase risk for disparities in outcomes. Children living in single-parent homes experience poverty at a higher rate than those liv- ing in two-parent homes. 

Chronic stress and adverse experiences in childhood can have far- reaching consequences that negatively affect health and developmental outcomes (see Chapters 1 and 2). However, parenting—in the form of safe, stable, and nurturing relationships (SSNRs)-has been suggested as one of a number of strategies that can promote resilience and buffer adversity and turn potentially toxic stress responses into tolerable or positive responses. PARENTING STYLES Parenting practices are significantly influenced by culture, defined as a pattern of social norms, values, language, and behavior shared by a group of individuals. Approaches to self-regulation, for example, vary across cultures with respect to promoting attention, compli- ance, delayed gratification, executive function, and effortful control. In examining parent practices, it is important to recognize the role of structural racism and bias on the design and interpretation of parent- Three styles of parenting have been described: authoritative, authoritarian, and permissive. Each style has varying approaches to parental control and responsiveness. A fourth style, neglect- ful parenting, has also been suggested. Authoritative parenting describes a parenting style that is warm, responsive, and accepting but that also sets expectations for behavior and achievement. Dit- ferences are approached with reasoning and discussion rather than by exerting control. Authoritarian parenting is characterized by a high degree of parental control in which obedience is expected. Punishment is often employed to foster compliance rather than ver- bal discussion. Permissive parenting refers to an approach charac- terized by warmth and acceptance with the child's autonomy being highly valued, but with few rules or expectations. This contrasts with neglectful parenting, similarly characterized by few rules or expectations but also by limited parental warmth or responsiveness. An authoritative parenting style is most likely to be associated with positive child outcomes across multiple domains, including educa- tional achievement and social-emotional competence. Parental super- vision, consistency, and open communication reduce risky behaviors in adolescents. Harsh, inconsistent, and coercive discipline and physi- cal punishment have been associated with increases in emotional and behavioral problems. Child physical abuse is often preceded by corpo- ral punishment. In addition to a higher rate of aggression and behav- ioral problems, children who have experienced physical punishment have been found to have lower IOs and smaller prefrontal cortexes compared to those who have not. Much of the initial research on par- enting styles was based on select U.S. populations (White middle-class CHILD TEMPERAMENT As evidenced by the effects of family structure, culture/ethnicity, and economics, parenting does not occur in isolation. The child also brings to the parent-child relationship their own personality, or temperament, a collection of traits that stay relatively constant over time (see Chapter 19). The initial temperament research iden- tified nine traits: activity level, predictability of behavior, reaction to new environments, adaptability, intensity, mood, distractibility, persistence, and sensitivity. Most infants (65%) fit into one of three groups, easy (40%), difficult (10%), and slow to warm up (15%), and these patterns are relatively stable over time. Although variations in temperament traits are part of normal human variations, certain behavioral difficulties have been associated with certain tempera- ment types. For example, a difficult temperament has been associ- ated with the development of externalizing behavior (e.g., acting out, disruptive, and aggressive behavior) and, not surprisingly, a slow-to-warm-up temperament with internalizing behavior (e.g., anxious and moody behavior). Temperament traits are relatively stable, but how the child func- tions is affected by the environment, especially by parenting and the "goodness of fit" between the parent and child. Children with difficult temperament characteristics respond more negatively to neglectful parenting, and children of all temperament groups Chapter 20 • Positive Parenting and Support 143 respond positively to responsive and sensitive parenting. Moreover, childhood traits such as low adaptability, impulsivity, and low frus- tration tolerance may lead some parents to engage in more negative parenting practices. These findings illustrate the interactive nature between parent and child, with parental behavior shaping child behavior, and vice versa. CHILD BEHAVIORAL PROBLEMS Emotional and behavioral problems are common in childhood. Early behavioral problems impact at least one in five children under age 5 in the United States and are associated with impairments in multiple domains, including family, academic, and social function- ing, which often continue into adulthood. Emotional and behav- ioral problems have been associated with single-parent households and poverty. Children in underserved populations experience life circumstances and structural barriers to care that place them at greater risk of behavior problems and unmet needs. High rates of socioeconomic disadvantage, inadequate social infrastructure, neighborhood exposure to violence, repetitive experiences of dis- crimination, and chronic exposure to racism among minoritized children can have significant adverse effects on children's physical and mental health. Although negative parenting may contribute to and exacerbate such problems, positive parenting practices have been shown to buffer against poor outcome for children growing up in such adversity. Other risk factors for the development of challenging behavior include trauma and developmental problems. Adverse childhood experiences (ACEs), defined as abuse and neglect, caregiver sub- stance use, caregiver mental health problems, and domestic violence or criminality, are often present during childhood (see Chapter 1). In the National Survey of Child and Adolescent Well-Being there was a cumulative relationship between emotional and behavioral problems and ACE exposure, with children exposed to four or more ACEs being almost five times more likely to have internalizing prob- lems than children not exposed to ACEs. A similar relationship was found for externalizing problems. Studies involving children with developmental disabilities suggest emotional and behavioral prob- lems occur more frequently in this group than in typically devel- oping children. These children may have delays in self-regulation and communication skills as well as increased family stress, which contribute to the increased likelihood of behavioral challenges. DEFINING POSITIVE PARENTING The precise definition of the components of positive parenting is lacking. Positive parenting must ensure the child's safety, health, and nutrition as well as developmental promotion. Common attri- butes of positive parenting include caring, leading, providing, teaching, and communicating with the child in a consistent and unconditional manner. To account for the long-term goals of suc- cessful parenting in promoting optimal emotional, behavioral, and developmental outcomes, some suggest the term purposeful par- enting and related characteristics (Table 20.1). The characterization of an ideal approach to parenting will evolve with ever-changing societal norms, but key components such as those in Table 20.1 will likely remain fundamental. PARENTING AS AN INTERVENTION The influence of parenting practices on child behavior, development, and overall adjustment has led to efforts to teach parenting as a method of primary prevention. The Video Interaction Project (VIP) uses a coaching and education model with recorded parent-child interac- tions to foster positive parenting behavior. These parenting behaviors range from reading aloud to encouraging interactive play. In an urban, low-income, primary care setting, parent and child outcomes for the VIP group were compared to those from a lower-intensity intervention (parent mailings encouraging positive parenting behaviors) and a con- trol group. VIP produced the most robust impacts on socioemotional outcomes, including decreased distress with separation, hyperactivity, and externalizing behavior in toddlers. 

144 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 20.1 Components of Purposeful Parenting ATTRIBUTE Protective DEFINING ACTIONS Ensure the child's emotional, developmental, and physiologic needs are met. Provide a safe environment. Balance the need for safety with the child's need for exploration and independence. Personal Show unconditional love and acceptance. Be kind and gentle. Avoid name-calling and harsh language. Label emotions and behaviors to help children understand their feelings. Teach and model helpful behavior rather than just saying "no." Progressive Adapt parenting skills and discipline to meet the child's developmental needs. Learn about child development to know what to expect. Notice and praise new skills and desirable behaviors. Positive Be warm, supportive, and optimistic, even during times of misbehavior. Avoid harsh or physical punishments. Provide encouragement and reward effort, not just a positive result. Playful Enjoy child-led time together to encourage exploration, foster creativity, and learn new skills. Read together. Purposeful Take care of your needs as a parent. Keep the long-term goals of parenting in mind. Preferentially use teaching instead of punishment to encourage desirable behavior. Be consistent with routines and expectations. Try to understand the reason behind the child's behavior. Adapted from the work of Andrew Garner and the Ohio Chapter, American Academy of Pediatrics. http://ohioaap.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/BPoM_PurposefulPare nting.pdf. Positive parenting as a public health intervention has resulted in decreased rates of substantiated child maltreatment cases, out-of- home placements, and child maltreatment injuries. Other effective public health approaches include home-visiting programs, which have been deployed to at-risk families in an effort to improve mater- nal and child outcomes. The Maternal, Infant and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program, authorized as part of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 and again in 2015, is part of the Medicare Access and Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) Reauthorization Act. A key component of home-visiting programs is the promotion of positive parenting behavior to foster child developmental and school readiness. Group parenting programs have been deployed as primary prevention to promote emotional and behavioral adjust- ment in young children. There is moderate-quality evidence that group-based parenting programs may improve parent-child inter- actions. These programs typically employ praise, encouragement, and affection and have been associated with improved self-esteem and social and academic competence. Parenting behaviors have also been employed as an intervention to treat emotional and behavioral problems in young children. Par- enting interventions such as Incredible Years, Triple P Positive Par- enting Program, New Forrest Parenting Program, and Child Adult Relationship Enhancement in Primary Care are effective for at least short-term improvements in child conduct problems, parental mental health, and parenting practices. Also called parent training programs, most teach the importance of play, rewards, praise, and consistent discipline and allow parents to practice new skills. This active-learning component distinguishes parent training programs Table 20.2 Parent Training Program Components COMPONENT ACTIVITIES Knowledge about Providing developmentally appropriate child development environment and behavior Learning about child development Promoting positive emotional development Positive parent-child interactions Learning the importance of positive, non-discipline-focused interactions Using skills that promote positive interactions Providing frequent positive attention Responsiveness and warmth Responding sensitively to the child's emotional needs Providing appropriate physical contact and affection Emotional communication Disciplinanication Using active listening to foster communication Helping children identify and express emotion Setting clear, appropriate, and consistent expectations Establishing limits and rules Choosing and following through with appropriate consequences Discipline and behavior management Understanding child misbehavior Understanding appropriate discipline strategies Using safe and appropriate monitoring and supervision practices Using reinforcement techniques Using problem solving for challenging behavior Being consistent Promoting children's Teaching children to share, cooperate, and social skills and get along with others prosocial behavior Using good manners Promoting children's cognitive or Prototi lasage end iteracy development academic skills Adapted from U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Parent training programs: insight for practitioners, Atlanta, CDC;2009. from educational programs, which have been shown to be less effective. Teaching emotional communication skills and positive parent- child interaction skills are associated with parent training programs that demonstrate a greater increase in parenting skills (Table 20.2). Several components are associated with programs that show greater improvements in child externalizing behavior including teaching parents to interact positively and respond consistently to their chil- dren as well as to use time-out correctly. All successful programs require parents to practice parenting skills during the program. Parents have been found to benefit from participation in parenting programs. Before their participation, parents experienced a loss of con- trol, self-blame, social isolation, and difficulty dealing with their child's emotional and behavioral problems, all of which improved after par- ticipation. The few studies that have assessed the long-term efficacy of parent-training programs suggest overall positive child outcomes but also periods of relapse during which the use of positive parenting skills decreased. Use of social supports is associated with positive child out- comes and may be an important program component when consider- ing long-term success. THE ROLE OF THE PEDIATRICIAN Pediatricians and other pediatric practitioners have a primary respon- sibility to support the needs of parents and their children. Numerous programs and interventions have been developed to be delivered effec- tively and efficiently in the primary care setting. 

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) publishes Bright Futures and the associated Guidelines for Preventive Care to standardize child health promotion and prevention in primary care. A substantial amount of the content in Bright Futures maps to the positive-parenting domains of satety, feeding, developmental promotion, and protection. Implementing Bright Futures guidelines in health supervision visits is an important way for pediatric practitioners to support the promotion of positive parenting in practice. The AAP's policy statement titled Pre- venting Childhood Toxic Stress: Partnering with Families and Com- munities to Promote Relational Health describes the importance of the parent-child relationship in building the foundation for healthy child development as well as buffering the effects of more significant Reading aloud to children is a powerful strategy to promote language development, early literacy, and positive parent-child interaction. The Reach Out and Read program is a primary care- based intervention that trains practitioners to encourage parents to read with their child and provides books to at-risk families. In the absence of a formal partnership with Reach Out and Read, practi- tioners should promote the benefits of reading aloud to children and support parents in their efforts to develop habits that incorpo- rate reading into daily routines. In addition to VIP described earlier, other primary care mod- els to promote parenting have been studied. The Healthy Steps for Young Children program is a strengths-based approach delivered in the primary care setting from infancy to age 3 years. Healthy Steps promotes changes in parents' knowledge, beliefs, and psy- chologic health and changes in parenting behaviors using a variety of methods delivered in the office setting by the practitioner and Healthy Steps specialists and through home visits. Extensive evalu- ations have shown improvements in parental well-being, parenting practices, and parent-child attachment and decreased child behav- ior problems. Another promising approach uses community health workers and nurses to provide parenting education and allow moth- ers to practice parenting skills outside the office setting. If participation in a formal parenting program is not possible, pedi- atric practitioners can still implement a systematic approach to sup- port the needs of parents and their children. Practitioners can take advantage of materials in the public domain from national organiza- tions devoted to child and family health, such as ZERO TO THREE (https://www.zerotothree.org/) and AAP (https://www.aap.org/). The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also provides evidenced-based parenting resources (https://www.cdc.gov/parents/ essentials/index.html). Additional components include early identifi- cation of parents' concerns, addressing concerns in a supportive and nonjudgmental way, and providing linkage to treatment services when appropriate. Parents want more information about child development, but parents of children with behavior problems often feel stigmatized and isolated. Practitioners are encouraged to be supportive and optimistic in their interactions with families and to develop a part- nership aimed at promoting parent and child health (see Chapter 18). Practitioners may also encourage parents to practice new skills briefly in the office setting before trying a new skill at home. Active modeling by the practitioner using "teachable moments" may also be effective. DISCIPLINE/PUNISHMENT Discipline is meant to teach children to learn good behavior and thus enhance child development. There are many positive parenting approaches to discipline that help avoid confrontations and to also correct behavior without conflict or physical punishment (Tables 20.3 and 20.4) (see Chapters 25 and 26). In addition, parents should teach by example; rather than prompting a child to say thank you, Chapter 20 • Positive Parenting and Support 145 Table 20.3 UNICEF Approach to Positive Discipline • Create one-on-one times for engagement • Praise good behavior • Set clear and realistic expectations • Distract to a more positive activity • Calm (not shouting) realistic consequences (if/then) Data from United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). How to discipline your child the smart and healthy way. https://www.unicef.org/parenting/child-care/how-discipline- your-child-smart-and-healthy-way. Table 20.4 CDC Time-Out Steps 1. Identify behavior and give warning 2. Explain why time-out 3. Go to time-out space • No talking : No Playing : No excuses from child • Time for both parent and child to calm down 4. End time-out 5. Explain why there was a time-out 6. Praise next positive behavior Time-out duration rule is ~ 1 minute per child age in years Adapted from U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Using discipline and consequences. https://www.cdc.gov/parents/essentials/consequences/index.html. Accessed 14 March 2022. the parents saying thank you is a behavior that an imitating child will follow. Furthermore, when possible, give the child a choice between positive activities, thus enhancing autonomy and prevent- ing conflict. In verbal children, it is helpful to engage the child in problem solving by asking "how can we make this better?" Corporal (physical) punishment is viewed as a violation of the child's right of protection by the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Children. It is viewed by the CDC as a form of child abuse. Corporal punishment is the use of force to produce harm, pain, or discomfort in a dependent child for the purpose of correcting behav- ior or showing disapproval. It may be manifest by hitting, striking, smacking, slapping, whupping, pinching, kicking, shaking, burning/ scalding, pulling hair, washing the mouth with soap or other harmful substances, forcing the child to assume a painful or prolonged pos- ture/position, or using an object to inflict harm. Parents who use cor- poral punishment may have experienced this punishment as a child. Use of corporal punishment is also associated with adults who misuse drugs, are depressed, or experience intimate partner violence. The consequences of corporal punishment to the child include wors- ening behavioral problems including aggression and adverse effects on cognitive development and mental health (anxiety, depression). In addition, corporal punishment does not correct the behavior. Further- more, there may be a dose-response relationship between the frequency of corporal punishment and adverse child behaviors and development. For age-related approaches to discipline see Chapters 24, 25, and 26. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

146 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Chapter 21 Assessment of Fetal Growth and Development Alexander S. Whitaker and Susan Feigelman The developing fetus is affected by social and environmental influ- ences, including maternal nutritional status, substance use (both legal and illicit), and psychologic trauma. Correspondingly, the psychologic alterations experienced by the parents during the gestation profoundly impact the lives of all members of the family. The complex interplay among these forces and the somatic and neurologic transformations occurring in the fetus influence growth and behavior at birth, through infancy, and potentially throughout the individual's life. SOMATIC DEVELOPMENT Embryonic Period Table 21.1 lists milestones of prenatal development. By 6 days post- conception age, as implantation begins, the embryo consists of a spherical mass of cells with a central cavity (the blastocyst). By 2 weeks, implantation is complete and the uteroplacental circulation has begun; the embryo has two distinct layers, endoderm and ectoderm, and the amnion has started to form. By 3 weeks, the third primary germ layer (mesoderm) has appeared, along with a primitive neural tube and blood vessels. Paired heart tubes have begun to pump. During weeks 4-8, lateral folding of the embryologic plate, followed by growth at the cranial and caudal ends and the budding of arms and legs, produces a human-like shape. Precursors of skeletal muscle and vertebrae (somites) appear, along with the branchial arches that will form the mandible, maxilla, palate, external ear, and other head and neck structures. Lens placodes appear, marking the site of future eyes; the brain grows rapidly. By the end of week 8, as the embryonic period closes, the rudiments of all major organ systems have developed; the crown-rump length is 3 cm. Fetal Period From the ninth week on (fetal period), somatic changes consist of rapid body growth as well as differentiation of tissues, organs, and organ systems. Figure 21.1 depicts changes in body proportion. By week 10, the face is recognizably human. The midgut returns to the abdomen from the umbilical cord, rotating counterclockwise to bring the stomach, small intestine, and large intestine into their normal positions. By week 12, the gender of the external genitals becomes clearly distinguishable. Lung development proceeds, with the bud- ding of bronchi, bronchioles, and successively smaller divisions. By weeks 20-24, primitive alveoli have formed and surfactant produc- tion has begun; before that time, the absence of alveoli renders the lungs useless as organs of gas exchange. During the third trimester, weight triples and length doubles as body stores of protein, fat, iron, and calcium increase. NEUROLOGIC DEVELOPMENT During the third week, a neural plate appears on the ectodermal surface of the trilaminar embryo. Infolding produces a neural tube that will become the central nervous system and a neural crest that will become the peripheral nervous system. Neuroectodermal cells differentiate into neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and epen- dymal cells, whereas microglial cells are derived from mesoderm. By the fifth week, the three main subdivisions of forebrain, mid- brain, and hindbrain are evident. The dorsal and ventral horns of the spinal cord have begun to form, along with the peripheral motor and sensory nerves. Myelination begins at midgestation and contin- ues for years. By the end of the embryonic period (week 8), the gross structure of the nervous system has been established. On a cellular level, neurons migrate outward to form the six cortical layers. Migration is complete by the sixth month, but differentiation continues. Axons and dendrites form synaptic connections at a rapid pace, making the central nervous system vulnerable to teratogenic or hypoxic influences throughout ges- tation. Figure 21.2 shows rates of increase in DNA (a marker of cell number), overall brain weight, and cholesterol (a marker of myelin- ization). Epigenetic modifications are made in the presence of fetal gonadal steroids, directing masculinization of the male brain. The prenatal and postnatal peaks of DNA probably represent rapid growth of neurons and glia, respectively. The glial cells are important in shap- ing the brain and neuronal circuits. The various types of glial cells are needed for the formation of axonal myelin sheaths, a range of functions in the formation and maintenance of neural pathways, and removal of waste (the brain has no lymphoid system for this task). By the time of birth, the structure of the brain is complete. However, many cells will undergo apoptosis (cell death). Synapses will be pruned back substantially, and new connections will be made, largely as a result of experience. Many psychiatric and developmental disorders are thought to result at least in part from disruptions in the functional connectivity of brain networks. Disorders of connectivity may begin during fetal life; MRI studies provide a developmental timetable for such connections that lend support to the possible role of disruptions in the establishment of such connections. BEHAVIORAL DEVELOPMENT No behavioral evidence of neural function is detectable until the third month. Reflexive responses to tactile stimulation develop in a cranio- caudal sequence. By weeks 13-14, breathing and swallowing motions appear. The grasp reflex appears at 17 weeks and is well developed by 27 weeks. Eye opening occurs around 26-28 weeks. By midgestation, the full range of neonatal movements can be observed. During the third trimester, fetuses respond to external stimuli with heart rate elevation and body movements, which can be observed with ultrasound (see Chapter 117). Reactivity to auditory (vibroacoustic) and visual (bright light) stimuli vary, depending on their behavioral state, which can be characterized as quiet sleep, active sleep, or awake. Individual differences in the level of fetal activity are usually noted by mothers. Fetuses will preferentially turn to light patterns in the con- figuration of the human face. Fetal movement is affected by maternal medications and diet, increasing after ingestion of caffeine. Behavior may be entrained to the mother's diurnal rhythms: asleep during the day, active at night. Abnormal fetal movement patterns are found in neonates with subsequent muscular or neurologic abnormalities. Fetal movement increases in response to a sudden auditory tone but decreases after several repetitions. This demonstrates habitua- tion, a basic form of learning in which repeated stimulation results in a response decrement. If the tone changes in pitch, the movement increases again, which is evidence that the fetus distinguishes between a familiar, repeated tone and a novel tone. Habituation improves in older fetuses and decreases in neurologically impaired or physically stressed fetuses. Similar responses to visual and tactile stimuli have PSYCHOLOGIC CHANGES IN PARENTS Many psychologic changes occur during pregnancy. An unplanned pregnancy may be met with anger, denial, or depression. Ambivalent feelings are common, whether or not the pregnancy was planned. Ela- tion at the thought of producing a baby and the wish to be the perfect parent compete with fears of inadequacy and of the lifestyle changes that parenting will impose. Parents of an existing child may feel protec- tive of the child, worried that the child may feel less valued. Old con- flicts may resurface as a woman psychologically identifies with her own mother and with herself as a child. The father-to-be faces similar mixed feelings, and problems in the parental relationship may intensify. Tangible evidence that a fetus exists as a separate being, whether as a result of ultrasonic visualization or awareness of fetal move- ments known as quickening (at 16-20 weeks), often heightens a 

woman's feelings. Parents worry about the fetus's healthy devel- opment and mentally rehearse what they will do if the child is malformed, including their response to evidence of abnormality through ultrasound, amniocentesis, or other fetal laboratory tests. Toward the end of pregnancy, a woman becomes aware of patterns of fetal activity and reactivity and begins to ascribe to her fetus an individual personality and an ability to survive independently. Appreciation of the psychologic vulnerability of the expectant par- ents and of the powerful contribution of fetal behavior facilitates supportive clinical intervention. Table 21.1 WK 1 2 3 7 9 12 20 25 28 38 Milestones of Prenatal Development DEVELOPMENTAL EVENTS Fertilization and implantation; beginning of embryonic period Endoderm and ectoderm appear (bilaminar embryo) First missed menstrual period; mesoderm appears (trilaminar embryo); somites begin to form Neural folds fuse; folding of embryo into human-like shape; arm and leg buds appear; crown-rump length 4-5 mm Lens placodes, primitive mouth, digital rays on hands Primitive nose, philtrum, primary palate Eyelids begin; crown-rump length 2cm Ovaries and testes distinguishable Fetal period begins; crown-rump length 5cm; weight 8 g External genitals distinguishable Usual lower limit of viability; weight 460g; length 19 cm Third trimester begins; weight 900g; length 24 cm Eyes open; fetus turns head down; weight 1,000-1,300 g Term Chapter 21 • Assessment of Fetal Growth and Development 147 THREATS TO FETAL DEVELOPMENT Mortality and morbidity are highest during the prenatal period (see Chapter 114). An estimated 50% of all pregnancies end in spontaneous abortion, including 10-15% of all clinically recognized pregnancies. The majority occur in the first trimester. Many spontaneous abor- tions occur as a result of chromosomal abnormalities, most commonly aneuploidies. Teratogens associated with gross physical and mental abnormalities include various infectious agents (e.g., toxoplasmosis, rubella, syphilis, Zika virus), chemical agents (e.g., mercury, thalidomide, antiepileptic medications, retinoids, ethanol), high temperature, and radiation (see Chapters 117 and 758). Teratogenic effects may also result in decreased growth and cog- nitive or behavioral deficits that only become apparent later in life. Nicotine has vasoconstrictor properties and may disrupt dopaminer- gic and serotonergic pathways. Prenatal exposure to cigarette smoke is associated with lower birthweight, stunting, and smaller head cir- cumference. It is also associated with changes in neonatal neurode- velopmental assessments; later, these children are at increased risk for learning problems, attention and behavior disorders, and other long- term health effects. Alcohol is a common teratogen affecting physi- cal development, cognition, and behavior (see Chapter 146). Prenatal exposure to opiates can result in neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) characterized by irritability, poor feeding, tremors and temperature instability in newborn infants. Affected infants may require treatment with low-dose opiates to abate the symptoms. School-age children with a history of NAS are significantly more likely to have educational dis- abilities, even when controlling for external factors such as maternal educational attainment and gestational age. The effects of prenatal exposure to cocaine, also occurring through alternations in placental blood flow and in direct toxic effects to the developing brain, have been followed in several cohorts and are less dramatic than previously believed. Exposed adolescents show small but significant effects in behavior and functioning but may not show cognitive impairment. Associated risk factors including alcohol and tobacco use, and postnatal environments frequently characterized by toxic stress, may explain some of the observed negative developmental outcomes. (see Chapters 1, 15, and 17). The association between an inadequate nutrient supply to the fetus and low birthweight has been recognized for decades; this adaptation 2 months (tetal) 5 months (fetal) Newbom 2 years 6 years 12 years 25 years Fig. 21.1 Changes in body proportions. Approximate changes in body proportions from fetal life through adulthood. (From Leifer G. Introduction to Maternity & Pediatric Nursing. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;2011: pp 347-385, Fig. 15-2.) 

148 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Increments percent adult/five weeks 10 7.5 2.5 20 40 6 12 18 24 Weeks Birth Months Fig. 21.2 Velocity curves of the various components of human brain growth. Blue line, DNA; red line, brain weight; green line, cholesterol. From Brasel JA, Gruen RK. In Falkner F, Tanner JM, eds: Human Growth: a comprehensive treatise. New York: Plenum Press; 1986: pp 78-95. on the part of the fetus presumably increases the likelihood that the fetus will survive until birth. For any potential fetal insult, the extent and nature of its effects are determined by characteristics of the host as well as the dose and timing of the exposure. Inherited differences in the metabolism of ethanol, timing of exposure, and the mother's diet may explain the variability in fetal alcohol effects. Organ systems are most vulnerable during periods of maximum growth and differentia- tion, generally during the first trimester (organogenesis) (http://www epa.gov/children/children-are-not-little-adults details critical periods and specific developmental abnormalities). Fetal adaptations or responses to an adverse situation in utero, termed fetal programming or developmental plasticity, have life- long implications. Fetal programming may prepare the fetus for an environment that matches that experienced in utero. Fetal pro- gramming in response to some environmental and nutritional sig- nals in utero increases the risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and obesity in later life. These adverse long-term effects appear to represent a mismatch between environmental conditions faced by a fetus or neonate and the conditions that the individual will confront later in life. A fetus deprived of adequate calories may or may not face famine as a child or adolescent. One proposed mechanism for fetal programming is epigenetic imprinting, in which one of two alleles is turned off through environmentally induced epigenetic modification (see Chapter 97). Many environmental factors have been found to play a role in producing epigenetic modifications that are both transgenerational (direct effect on the developing fetus) and intergenerational (changes in the germ cells that will affect future generations). Just as the fetal adaptations to the in utero environment may increase the likelihood of later metabolic conditions, the fetus adapts to the mother's psychologic distress. In response to the stressful environment, physiologic changes involving the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the autonomic nervous system occur. Dysregulation of these sys- tems may explain the associations observed in some but not all studies between maternal distress and negative infant outcomes. These nega- tive outcomes include low birthweight, spontaneous abortion, prema- turity, and decreased head circumference. In addition, children born to mothers experiencing high stress levels have been found to have higher rates of inattention, impulsivity, conduct disorders, and nega- tive cognitive changes. Although these changes may have been adaptive in primitive cultures, they are maladaptive in modern societies, leading to psychopathology. Genetic variability, timing of stress during sensi- tive periods, and the quality of postnatal parenting can attenuate or exacerbate these associations. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 22 The Newborn Elisa Hampton and John M. Olsson See also Chapter 115. Regardless of gestational age, the newborn (neonatal) period begins at birth and includes the first month of life. During this time, marked physiologic transitions occur in all organ systems, and the infant learns to respond to many forms of external stimuli. Because infants thrive physically and psychologically only in the context of their social relationships, any description of the newborn's devel- opmental status has to include consideration of the parents' role as PARENTAL ROLE IN PARENT-INFANT ATTACHMENT Parenting a newborn infant requires dedication because a newborn's needs are urgent, continuous, and often unclear. Parents must attend to an infant's signals and respond empathically. Many factors influence parents' ability to assume this role. Prenatal Factors Pregnancy is a period of psychologic preparation for the profound demands of parenting. Expectant parents may experience ambiv- alence, particularly (but not exclusively) if the pregnancy was unplanned. Financial concerns, physical illness, prior miscarriages or stillbirths, or other crises may interfere with future bonding. For adolescent parents, the demand that they relinquish their own developmental agenda, such as an active social life, may be espe- cially burdensome. The transition to parenthood is a unique developmental phase, and a stressful one. Lifetime experiences of parents, particularly traumatic ones, may affect their approaches to developing a nurtur- ing relationship with their infant (Table 22.1). It has been shown that an increasing number of adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) may be associated with increased parental stress, a more authoritarian style of parenting, increased risk for child abuse, and greater insecurity in parent-child attachment (bonding). Identify- ing parental ACEs and addressing them with community resources, including parenting classes, parent aides, and parent support groups may help provide parents with the resilience to mitigate the effects of ACEs. Table 22.1 Prenatal Risk Factors for Attachment Recent death of a loved one Previous loss of or serious illness in another child Prior removal of a child History of depression or serious mental illness History of infertility or pregnancy loss Troubled relationship with parents Financial stress or job loss Marital discord or poor relationship with the other parent Recent move or no community ties No friends or social network Unwanted pregnancy No good parenting model Experience of poor parenting Drug and/or alcohol use Extreme immaturity From Dixon SD, Stein MT. Encounters With Children: Pediatric Behavior and Development. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006. p 131. 

148 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Increments percent adult/five weeks 10 7.5 2.5 20 40 6 12 18 24 Weeks Birth Months Fig. 21.2 Velocity curves of the various components of human brain growth. Blue line, DNA; red line, brain weight; green line, cholesterol. From Brasel JA, Gruen RK. In Falkner F, Tanner JM, eds: Human Growth: a comprehensive treatise. New York: Plenum Press; 1986: pp 78-95. on the part of the fetus presumably increases the likelihood that the fetus will survive until birth. For any potential fetal insult, the extent and nature of its effects are determined by characteristics of the host as well as the dose and timing of the exposure. Inherited differences in the metabolism of ethanol, timing of exposure, and the mother's diet may explain the variability in fetal alcohol effects. Organ systems are most vulnerable during periods of maximum growth and differentia- tion, generally during the first trimester (organogenesis) (http://www epa.gov/children/children-are-not-little-adults details critical periods and specific developmental abnormalities). Fetal adaptations or responses to an adverse situation in utero, termed fetal programming or developmental plasticity, have life- long implications. Fetal programming may prepare the fetus for an environment that matches that experienced in utero. Fetal pro- gramming in response to some environmental and nutritional sig- nals in utero increases the risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and obesity in later life. These adverse long-term effects appear to represent a mismatch between environmental conditions faced by a fetus or neonate and the conditions that the individual will confront later in life. A fetus deprived of adequate calories may or may not face famine as a child or adolescent. One proposed mechanism for fetal programming is epigenetic imprinting, in which one of two alleles is turned off through environmentally induced epigenetic modification (see Chapter 97). Many environmental factors have been found to play a role in producing epigenetic modifications that are both transgenerational (direct effect on the developing fetus) and intergenerational (changes in the germ cells that will affect future generations). Just as the fetal adaptations to the in utero environment may increase the likelihood of later metabolic conditions, the fetus adapts to the mother's psychologic distress. In response to the stressful environment, physiologic changes involving the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the autonomic nervous system occur. Dysregulation of these sys- tems may explain the associations observed in some but not all studies between maternal distress and negative infant outcomes. These nega- tive outcomes include low birthweight, spontaneous abortion, prema- turity, and decreased head circumference. In addition, children born to mothers experiencing high stress levels have been found to have higher rates of inattention, impulsivity, conduct disorders, and nega- tive cognitive changes. Although these changes may have been adaptive in primitive cultures, they are maladaptive in modern societies, leading to psychopathology. Genetic variability, timing of stress during sensi- tive periods, and the quality of postnatal parenting can attenuate or exacerbate these associations. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 22 The Newborn Elisa Hampton and John M. Olsson See also Chapter 115. Regardless of gestational age, the newborn (neonatal) period begins at birth and includes the first month of life. During this time, marked physiologic transitions occur in all organ systems, and the infant learns to respond to many forms of external stimuli. Because infants thrive physically and psychologically only in the context of their social relationships, any description of the newborn's devel- opmental status has to include consideration of the parents' role as PARENTAL ROLE IN PARENT-INFANT ATTACHMENT Parenting a newborn infant requires dedication because a newborn's needs are urgent, continuous, and often unclear. Parents must attend to an infant's signals and respond empathically. Many factors influence parents' ability to assume this role. Prenatal Factors Pregnancy is a period of psychologic preparation for the profound demands of parenting. Expectant parents may experience ambiv- alence, particularly (but not exclusively) if the pregnancy was unplanned. Financial concerns, physical illness, prior miscarriages or stillbirths, or other crises may interfere with future bonding. For adolescent parents, the demand that they relinquish their own developmental agenda, such as an active social life, may be espe- cially burdensome. The transition to parenthood is a unique developmental phase, and a stressful one. Lifetime experiences of parents, particularly traumatic ones, may affect their approaches to developing a nurtur- ing relationship with their infant (Table 22.1). It has been shown that an increasing number of adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) may be associated with increased parental stress, a more authoritarian style of parenting, increased risk for child abuse, and greater insecurity in parent-child attachment (bonding). Identify- ing parental ACEs and addressing them with community resources, including parenting classes, parent aides, and parent support groups may help provide parents with the resilience to mitigate the effects of ACEs. Table 22.1 Prenatal Risk Factors for Attachment Recent death of a loved one Previous loss of or serious illness in another child Prior removal of a child History of depression or serious mental illness History of infertility or pregnancy loss Troubled relationship with parents Financial stress or job loss Marital discord or poor relationship with the other parent Recent move or no community ties No friends or social network Unwanted pregnancy No good parenting model Experience of poor parenting Drug and/or alcohol use Extreme immaturity From Dixon SD, Stein MT. Encounters With Children: Pediatric Behavior and Development. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006. p 131. 

Social support during pregnancy, particularly support from the partner and close family members, is also important. Family support can promote resilience in the face of ACEs as described earlier. Many decisions have to be made by parents in anticipation of the birth of their child. One important choice is how the infant will be nourished. Among the important benefits of breastfeeding is its pro- motion of bonding. Providing breastfeeding education for the parents during prenatal pediatric or obstetric care can increase maternal confi- dence in breastfeeding after delivery, reduce stress during the newborn period, and promote increased breastfeeding rates and duration (see Peripartum and Postpartum Influences The continuous presence of a support person during labor results in shorter labor and fewer obstetric complications (including cesar- ean section). These beneficial effects may be even more pronounced when the support person is specially trained and present solely for the purpose of continuous support (a doula). Early skin-to-skin contact between mothers and infants immediately after birth is asso- ciated with an increased rate and longer duration of breastfeeding. Most new parents value even a brief period of uninterrupted time in which to get to know their new infant, and increased mother-infant contact over the first days of life may improve long-term mother- child interactions. Nonetheless, early separation, although predict- ably very stressful, does not inevitably impair a mother's ability to bond with her infant. Postpartum mood and anxiety disorder (PMAD) may occur in the first week or up to 6 months after delivery and can adversely affect neonatal growth and development. Screening tools, such as the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS), are available for use during neonatal and infant visits to the pediatric provider. Screening mothers for PMAD is recommended at the 1, 2, 4, and 6 month well child visit. PMAD is also seen in partners of postpartum women, but peaks later at 3-6 months. Pediatric providers should consider screening partners at the 6 month well child visit using the EPDS. A score of 10 or higher, or a positive response to question 10 (suicidal thoughts), in either postpartum women or their partners warrants referral for evaluation (Table 22.2). THE INFANT'S ROLE IN PARENT-INFANT ATTACHMENT The in utero environment contributes greatly but not completely to the future growth and development of the fetus. Abnormalities in maternal-fetal placental circulation and maternal glucose metabo- lism or the presence of maternal infection can result in abnormal fetal growth. Infants may be small or large for gestational age as a result. These abnormal growth patterns not only predispose infants to an increased requirement for medical intervention, but they also may affect their ability to respond behaviorally to their parents. Physical Examination Examination of the newborn should include an evaluation of growth (see Chapter 21) and an observation of behavior. The aver- age term newborn weighs approximately 3.4 kg (7.5 lb); boys are slightly heavier than girls. The average length and head circumfer- ence are about 50 cm (20 in) and 35 cm (14 in), respectively, in term infants. Each newborn's growth parameters should be plotted on growth curves specific for that infant's gestational age to determine the appropriateness of size. Specific growth charts for conditions associated with variations in growth patterns have also been devel- oped. It is important to note that in the United States, significant disparities exist in low birthweight (<2,500 g) rates with higher rates in low socioeconomic status (SES) groups and in minoritized populations. The infant's response to being examined may be useful in assess- ing its vigor, alertness, and tone. Observing how the parents handle Chapter 22 • The Newborn 149 their infant, their comfort, and affection is also important. The order of the physical examination should be from the least to the most intrusive maneuvers. Assessing visual tracking and response to sound and noting changes of tone with level of activity and alert- ness are very helpful. Performing this examination and sharing impressions with parents is an important opportunity to facilitate bonding (see Chapter 115). Interactional Abilities Soon after birth, neonates are alert and ready to interact and nurse. This first alert-awake period may be affected by maternal analgesics and anesthetics or fetal hypoxia. Neonates are nearsighted, having a fixed focal length of 8-12 inches, approximately the distance from the breast to the mother's face, as well as an inborn visual prefer- ence for faces. Hearing is well developed, and infants preferentially turn toward a female voice. These innate abilities and predilections increase the likelihood that when a mother gazes at her newborn, the baby will gaze back. The initial period of social interaction, usually lasting about 40 minutes, is followed by a period of somnolence. After that, briefer periods of alertness or excitation alternate with sleep. If a mother misses her baby's first alert-awake period, she may not experience as long a period of social interaction for several days. The hypothalamic-midbrain-limbic-paralimbic-cortical circuits of the parent's brain together support responses to the infant that are critical for effective parenting (e.g., emotion, attention, motivation, empathy, decision-making). Modulation of Arousal Adaptation to extrauterine life requires rapid and profound physi- ologic changes, including aeration of the lungs, rerouting of the circulation, and activation of the intestinal tract. The necessary behavioral changes are no less profound. To obtain nourishment, to avoid hypo- and hyperthermia, and to ensure safety, neonates must react appropriately to an expanded range of sensory stimuli. Infants must become aroused in response to stimulation, but not so over- aroused that their behavior becomes disorganized. Underaroused infants are not able to feed and interact; overaroused infants show signs of autonomic instability, including flushing or mottling, peri- oral pallor, hiccupping, vomiting, uncontrolled limb movements, and inconsolable crying. Behavioral States The organization of infant behavior into discrete behavioral states may reflect an infant's inborn ability to regulate arousal. Six states have been described: quiet sleep, active sleep, drowsy, alert, fussy, and crying. In the alert state, infants visually fixate on objects or faces and follow them horizontally and (within a month) vertically; they also reliably turn toward a novel sound, as if searching for its source. When overstimulated, they may calm themselves by looking away, yawning, or sucking on their lips or hands, thereby increas- ing parasympathetic activity and reducing sympathetic nervous system activity. The behavioral state determines an infant's muscle tone, spontaneous movement, electroencephalogram pattern, and response to stimuli. In active sleep, an infant may show progres- sively less reaction to a repeated heelstick (habituation), whereas in the drowsy state, the same stimulus may push a child into fussing Mutual Regulation Parents actively participate in an infant's state regulation, alternately stimulating and soothing. In turn, they are regulated by the infant's signals, responding to cries of hunger with a letdown of milk (or with a bottle). Such interactions constitute a system directed toward furthering the infant's physiologic homeostasis and physical growth. At the same time, they form the basis for the emerging psychologic relationship between parent and child. Infants come to associate the presence of the parent with the pleasurable reduction of tension (as 

Table 22.2 Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale INSTRUCTIONS FOR USERS 1. The mother is asked to underline the response that comes closest to how she has been feeling in the previous 7 days. 2. All 10 items must be completed. 3. Care should be taken to avoid the possibility of the mother discussing her answers with others. 4. The mother should complete the scale herself, unless she has limited English or has difficulty with reading. 5. The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale may be used at 6-8 wk to screen postnatal women. The child health clinic, a postnatal checkup, or a home visit may provide a suitable opportunity for its completion. EDINBURGH POSTNATAL DEPRESSION SCALE Name: Address: Baby's age: Because you have recently had a baby, we would like to know how you are feeling. Please underline the answer that comes closest to how you have felt in the past 7 days, not just how you feel today. Here is an example, already completed. I have felt happy: Yes, all the time Yes, most of the time No, not very often No, not at all This would mean: "I have felt happy most of the time" during the past week. Please complete the other questions in the same way. In the past 7 days: 1. I have been able to laugh and see the funny side of things • As much as I always could • Not quite so much now • Definitely not so much now • Not at all 2. I have looked forward with enjoyment to things • As much as l ever did • Rather less than I used to • Definitely less than I used to • Hardly at all *3. I has last of me if unnecessarily when things went wrong • Yes, some of the time • Not very often • No, never 4. I have been anxious or worried for no good reason • No, not at all • Hardly ever • Yes, sometimes • Yes, very often *5. I have felt scared or panicky for no very good reason • Yes, quite a lot • Yes, sometimes • No, not much • No, not at all *6. Things have been getting on top of me • Yes, most of the time I haven't been able to cope at all • Yes, sometimes I haven't been coping as well as usual • No, most of the time I have coped quite well • No, I have been coping as well as ever *7. I have been so unhappy that I have had difficulty sleeping • Yes, most of the time • Yes, sometimes • Not very often • No, not at all *8. I have felt sad or miserable • Yes, most of the time • Yes, quite often • Not very often • No, not at all *9. I have been so unhappy that I have been crying • Yes, most of the time • Yes, quite often • Only occasionally • No, never *10. The thought of harming myself has occurred to me • Yes, quite often • Sometimes • Hardly ever • Never Response categories are scored 0, 1, 2, and 3 according to increased severity of the symptom. Items marked with an asterisk (*) are reverse-scored (i.e., 3, 2, 1, and 0). The total score is calculated by adding the scores for each of the 10 items. Users may reproduce the scale without further permission provided they respect copyright (which remains with the British Journal of Psychiatry) by quoting the names of the authors, the title, and the source of the paper in all reproduced copies. Adapted from Cox JL, Holden JM, Sagovsky R. Detection of postnatal depression. Development of the 10-item Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. Br J Psychiatry. 1987;150:782- 786; reproduced from Currie ML, Rademacher R. The pediatrician's role in recognizing and intervening in postpartum depression. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2004;51(3):785-xi. 

in feeding) and show this preference by calming more quickly for their parent than for a stranger. This response in turn strengthens a parent's sense of efficacy and their connection with their baby. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PEDIATRICIAN The pediatrician can support healthy newborn development in several ways. Optimal Practices A prenatal pediatric visit allows pediatricians to assess both the strengths of the expectant parents and any needs they may have in anticipation of the birth of their infant. This should include assess- ment of social determinants of health and may consist of addressing needs such as baby supplies, financial assistance, and parental men- tal health support. Supportive hospital policies include the use of birthing rooms rather than operating suites and delivery rooms; encouraging the partner or a trusted relative or friend to remain with the mother during labor or the provision of a professional doula; the practice of giving the newborn infant to the mother immediately after drying and a brief assessment; keeping the newborn with the mother rather than in a central nursery; and avoiding in-hospital distribution of infant formula. Such policies ("Baby Friendly Hos- pital") have been shown to significantly increase breastfeeding rates (see Chapter 115.3). After discharge, home visits by nurses and lactation counselors can reduce early feeding problems and iden- tify emerging medical conditions in either mother or baby. Infants requiring transport to another hospital should be brought to see the mother first, if at all possible. Timing of hospital discharge should be individualized for each maternal-infant dyad based on the mode of delivery, presence or absence of specific risk factors, and any problems identified during the birth hospitalization. Some healthy term newborns may be discharged before 48 hours of life, and these newborns should be evaluated with a follow up visit by 3-5 days after birth and within 48-72 hours after discharge. The timing of the first visit for newborns with a longer initial hospital stay will depend on the newborn's specific issues and identified needs. Assessing Parent-Infant Interactions During a feeding or when infants are alert and face-to-face with their parents, it is normal for the dyad to appear absorbed in one another. Infants who become overstimulated by the parent's voice or activity may turn away or close their eyes, leading to a premature termination of the encounter. Alternatively, the infant may be ready to interact, but the parent may appear preoccupied. Asking a new mother about her own emotional state, and inquiring specifically about a history of depression, facilitates referral for therapy, which may provide long-term benefits to the child. Teaching About Individual Competencies The Newborn Behavior Assessment Scale (NBAS) provides a formal measure of an infant's neurodevelopmental competencies, including state control, autonomic reactivity, reflexes, habituation, and orientation toward auditory and visual stimuli. This examina- tion can also be used to demonstrate to parents an infant's capa- bilities and vulnerabilities. Parents might learn that they need to undress their infant to increase the level of arousal or to swaddle the infant to reduce overstimulation by containing random arm move- i can at mat tha ments. The NBAS can be used to support the development of posi- tive early parent-infant relationships. Demonstration of the NBAS to parents in the first week of life has been shown to correlate with improvements in the caretaking environment months later. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 23 • The First Year 151 Chapter 23 The First Year Mutiat T. Onigbanjo and Susan Feigelman The prenatal period and the first year of life provide the platform for remarkable growth and development, setting the trajectory for a child's life. Neural plasticity, the ability of the brain to be shaped by expe- rience, both positive and negative, is at its peak. Total brain volume doubles in the first year of life and increases by an additional 15% over the second year. Total brain volume at age 1 month is approximately 36% of adult volume but by age 1 year is approximately 72% (83% by 2 years) (Fig. 23.1). The acquisition of seemingly skills, such as swallow- ing, reflects a series of intricate and highly coordinated processes involving multiple levels of neural control distributed among sev- eral physiologic systems whose nature and relationships mature throughout the first year of life. Substantial learning of the basic tools of language (phonology, word segmentation) occurs during infancy. Speech processing in older individuals requires defined and precise neuronal networks; the infant brain possesses a struc- tural and functional organization similar to that of adults, sug- gesting that structural neurologic processing of speech may guide infants to discover the properties of their native language. Myelina- tion of the cortex begins at 7-8 months' gestation and continues into adolescence and young adulthood. It proceeds posterior to ante- rior, allowing progressive maturation of sensory, motor, and finally associative pathways. Given the importance of iron, cholesterol, and other nutrients in myelination, adequate stores throughout infancy are critical (see Chapter 61). Insufficient interactions with caregiv- ers or the wider environment may alter experience-dependent pro- cesses that are critical to brain structure development and function during infancy. Although for some processes, subsequent stimula- tion may allow catch-up; as the periods of plasticity close during the rapid developmental changes occurring in infancy, more per- manent deficits may result. The infant acquires new competences in all developmental domains. The concept of developmental trajectories recognizes that complex skills build on simpler ones; it is also important to realize how development in each domain affects functioning in all the others. All growth parameters should be plotted using the World Health Organization charts, which show how children from birth through 72 months "should" grow under optimal circumstances (see Figs. 24.1 and 24.2). Table 23.1 presents an overview of key milestones by domain; Table 23.2 presents similar information arranged by age. Table 23.3 presents age at time of x-ray appearance of centers of ossification. Parents often seek information about "normal development" during this period and should be directed to reliable sources, including the American Academy of Pediatrics web- site (www.healthychildren.org) or the Center for Disease Control website (www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/milestones/index.html). AGE 0-2 MONTHS In the full-term infant, myelination is present by the time of birth in the dorsal brainstem, cerebellar peduncles, and posterior limb of the inter- nal capsule. The cerebellar white matter acquires myelin by 1 month of age and is well myelinated by 3 months. The subcortical white matter of the parietal, posterior frontal, temporal, and calcarine cortex is partially myelinated by 3 months of age. In this period the infant experiences tre- mendous growth. Physiologic changes allow the establishment of effec- tive feeding routines and a predictable sleep-wake cycle. The social interactions that occur as parents and infants accomplish these tasks lay the foundation for cognitive and emotional development. 

152 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Total Brain Volume Volume of the Cortical Hemispheres 1250000 1250000 1000000 1000000 Volume in mm' 750000 - 750000 500000 - 500000 !:. 250000 250000 0 0 A 12 Age in months Cerebellum 24 B 12 Age in months Subcortical and Brainstem 24 1500000 1000000, 750000 - Volume in mm? 100000 50000 Volume in mm® 500000 250000 0 0 12 24 12 24 C Age in months D Age in months Fig. 23.1 Scatterplots showing brain growth in the first 2 years of life. A, Total brain volume by age at scan. B, Cortical hemispheres. C, Cerebellum. D, Subcortical region and brainstem. (From Knickmeyer RC, Gouttard S, Kang C, et al. A structural MRI study of human brain development from birth to 2 years. J Neurosci. 2008;28:12176-12182.) Physical Development A newborn's weight may initially decrease 10% (vaginal delivery) to 12% (cesarean section) below birthweight in the first week as a result of excre- tion of excess extravascular fluid and limited nutritional intake. Nutri- tion improves as colostrum is replaced by higher-fat content breast milk, infants learn to latch on and suck more efficiently, and mothers become more comfortable with feeding techniques. Infants regain or exceed birthweight by 2 weeks of age and should grow at approximately 30 g (1 oz) per day during the first month (see Table 27.1). This is the period of fastest postnatal growth. Arms are held to the sides. Limb movements consist largely of uncontrolled writhing, with apparently purposeless opening and closing of the hands. Smiling occurs involuntarily. Eye gaze, head turning, and sucking are under better control and thus can be used to demonstrate infant perception and cognition. An infant's preferential turning toward the mother's voice is evidence of recognition memory. Six behavioral states have been described (see Chapter 22). Initially, sleep and wakefulness are evenly distributed throughout the 24 hour day (Fig. 23.2). Neurologic maturation accounts for the consolidation of sleep into blocks of 5 or 6 hours at night, with brief awake, feeding periods. Learning also occurs; infants whose parents are consistently more interactive and stimulating during the day learn to concentrate their sleeping during the night. Cognitive Development Infants can differentiate among patterns, colors, and consonants. They can recognize facial expressions (smiles) as similar, even when they appear on different faces. They also can match abstract properties of stimuli, such as contour, intensity, or temporal pattern, across sensory modalities. Infants at 2 months of age can discriminate rhythmic pat- terns in native vs nonnative language. Infants appear to seek stimuli actively, as though satisfying an innate need to make sense of the world. These phenomena point to the integration of sensory inputs in the cen- tral nervous system. Caretaking activities provide visual, tactile, olfac- tory, and auditory stimuli, all of which support the development of cognition. Infants habituate to the familiar, attending less to repeated stimuli and increasing their attention to novel stimuli. Emotional Development The infant is dependent on the environment to meet its needs. The con- sistent availability of a trusted adult to meet the infant's urgent needs creates the conditions for secure attachment. Basic trust vs mistrust, the first of Erikson's psychosocial stages (see Chapter 19), depends on attachment and reciprocal maternal bonding. Crying occurs in response to stimuli that may be obvious (a soiled diaper) but are often obscure (see Chapter 23.1). Infants who are consistently picked up and held in response to distress cry less at 1 year and show less aggressive behavior at 2 years. Infants of adolescent mothers who are trained to carry their babies demonstrate secure attachment. Infants cry in response to the cry of another infant, which has been interpreted as an early sign of empathy. Implications for Parents and Pediatricians Success or failure in establishing feeding and sleep cycles influences parents' feelings of competence. When things go well, the parents' anxiety and ambivalence, as well as the exhaustion of the early weeks, decrease. Infant issues (e.g., colic) or familial conflict may prevent this from occurring. With physical recovery from delivery and hormonal 

Chapter 23 • The First Year 153 Table 23.1 Developmental Milestones in First 2 Years of Life MILESTONE GROSS MOTOR Holds head steady while sitting Pulls to sit, with no head lag Brings hands together in midline Asymmetric tonic neck reflex gone Sits without support Rolls back to stomach Walks alone Runs FINE MOTOR Grasps rattle Reaches for objects Palmar grasp gone Transfers object hand to hand Thumb-finger grasp Turns pages of book Scribbles Builds tower of two cubes Builds tower of six cubes AVERAGE AGE OF ATTAINMENT (MO) COMMUNICATION AND LANGUAGE Smiles in response to face, voice Monosyllabic babble Inhibits to "no" Follows one-step command with gesture Follows one-step command without gesture Says "mama" or "dada" Points to objects Speaks first real word Speaks 4-6 words Speaks 10-15 words Speaks two-word sentences (e.g., "Mommy shoe") COGNITIVE Stares momentarily at spot where object disappeared Stares at own hand Bangs two cubes Uncovers toy (after seeing it hidden) Egocentric symbolic play (e.g., pretends to drink from cup) Uses stick to reach toy Pretend play with doll (e.g., gives doll bottle) 2 3 3 4 6 6.5 12 16 3.5 4 4 5.5 8 12 13 15 22 1.5 6 7 7 10 10 10 12 15 18 19 2 4 8 8 12 17 17 DEVELOPMENTAL IMPLICATIONS Allows more visual interaction Muscle tone Self-discovery of hands Can inspect hands in midline Increasing exploration Truncal flexion, risk of falls Exploration, control of proximity to parents Supervision more difficult Object use Visuomotor coordination Voluntary release Comparison of objects Able to explore small objects Increasing autonomy during book time Visuomotor coordination Uses objects in combination Requires visual, gross, and fine motor coordination More active social participant Experimentation with sound, tactile sense Response to tone (nonverbal) Nonverbal communication Verbal receptive language (e.g., "Give it to me") Expressive language Interactive communication Beginning of labeling Acquisition of object and personal names Acquisition of object and personal names Beginning grammatization, corresponds with 50-word vocabulary Lack of object permanence (out of sight, out of mind; e.g., yarn ball dropped) Self-discovery, cause and effect Active comparison of objects Object permanence Beginning symbolic thought Able to link actions to solve problems Symbolic thought normalization, the mild postpartum "blues" that affects many mothers passes. If the mother continues to feel sad, overwhelmed, or anxiety, the possibility of moderate to severe postpartum depression or anxi- ety, found in 20-25% of postpartum women, needs to be considered. Major depression that arises during pregnancy or in the postpartum period threatens the mother-child relationship and is a risk factor for later cognitive and behavioral problems. Postpartum depression is often reported in mothers and can also occur in fathers. It can pres- ent over the course of a year with symptoms of depression or irrita- bility. The pediatrician may be the first professional to encounter the depressed parent and should be instrumental in assisting the parent in seeking treatment (see Chapter 22). AGE 2-6 MONTHS At about age 2 months, the emergence of voluntary (social) smiles and increasing eye contact mark a change in the parent-child relationship, heightening the parents' sense of being loved reciprocally. During the next months, an infant's range of motor and social control and cognitive engagement increases dramatically. Mutual regulation takes the form of complex social interchanges, resulting in strong mutual attachment and enjoyment. Routines are established. Parents are less fatigued. Physical Development Between 3 and 4 months of age, the rate of growth slows to approxi- mately 20 g/day (see Table 27.1 and Figs. 24.1 and 24.2). By age 4 months, birthweight is doubled. Early reflexes that limited voluntary movement recede (e.g., primitive reflexes; see Chapter 630). Disap- pearance of the asymmetric tonic neck reflex means that infants can begin to examine objects in the midline and manipulate them with both hands. Waning of the early grasp reflex allows infants both to hold objects and to let them go voluntarily. A novel object may elicit purposeful, although inefficient, reaching. The quality of spontaneous movements also changes, from larger (proximal) writhing to smaller, circular (distal) movements that have been described as "fidgety." Abnormal or absent fidgety movements may constitute a risk factor for later neurologic abnormalities. Increasing control of truncal flexion makes intentional rolling pos- sible. Once infants can hold their heads steady while sitting, they can 

154 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 23.2 Emerging Patterns of Behavior During the First Year of Life* NEONATAL PERIOD (0-4 WK) Prone: Lies in flexed attitude; turns head from side to side; head sags on ventral suspension Supine: Generally flexed and a little stiff Visual: May fixate face on light in line of vision; doll's eye movement (oculocephalic reflex) of eyes on turning of the body Reflex: Moro response active; stepping and placing reflexes; grasp reflex active Social: Visual preference for human face AT 1 MO Prone: Legs more extended; holds chin up; turns head; head lifted momentarily to plane of body on ventral suspension Supine: Tonic neck posture predominates; supple and relaxed; head lags when pulled to sitting position Visual: Watches person; follows moving object Social: Body movements in cadence with voice of other in social contact; beginning to smile AT 2 MO Prone: Raises head slightly farther; head sustained in plane of body on ventral suspension Supine: Tonic neck posture predominates; head lags when pulled to sitting position Visual: Follows moving object 180 degrees Social: Smiles on social contact; listens to voice and coos АТ 3 МО Prone: Lifts head and chest with arms extended; head above plane of body on ventral suspension Supine: Tonic neck posture predominates; reaches toward and misses objects; waves at toy Sitting: Head lag partially compensated when pulled to sitting position; early head control with bobbing motion; back rounded Reflex: Typical Moro response has not persisted; makes defensive movements or selective withdrawal reactions Social: Sustained social contact; listens to music; says "aah, ngah" AT 4 MO Prone: Lifts head and chest, with head in approximately vertical axis; legs extended Supine: Symmetric posture predominates, hands in midline; reaches and grasps objects and brings them to mouth Sitting: No head lag when pulled to sitting position; head steady, tipped forward; enjoys sitting with full truncal support Standing: When held erect, pushes with feet Adaptive: Sees raisin, but makes no move to reach for it Social: Laughs out loud; may show displeasure if social contact is broken; excited at sight of food AT 7 MO Prone: Rolls over; pivots; crawls or creep-crawls (Knobloch) Supine: Lifts head; rolls over; squirms Sitting: Sits briefly, with support of pelvis; leans forward on hands; back rounded Standing: May support most of weight; bounces actively Adaptive: Reaches out for and grasps large object; transfers objects from hand to hand; grasp uses radial palm; rakes at raisin Language: Forms polysyllabic vowel sounds Social: Prefers mother; babbles; enjoys mirror; responds to changes in emotional content of social contact AT 10 MO Sitting: Sits up alone and indefinitely without support, with back straight Standing: Pulls to standing position; "cruises" or walks holding on to furniture Motor: Creeps or crawls Adaptive: Grass boss with thumb and ferdinger poke, things with for grasper picy up ples with assisted pincer movement; uncovers Language: Repetitive consonant sounds ("mama," "dada") Social: Responds to sound of name; plays peek-a-boo or pat-a-cake; waves bye-bye AT 1 YR Motor: Walks with one hand held; rises independently, takes several steps (Knobloch) Adaptive: Picks up raisin with unassisted pincer movement of forefinger and thumb; releases object to other person on request or gesture Language: Says a few words besides "mama," "dada" Social: Plays simple ball game; makes postural adjustment to dressing *Data are derived from those of Gesell (as revised by Knobloch), Shirley, Provence, Wolf, Bailey, and others. Data from Knobloch H, Stevens F, Malone AF. Manual of Developmental Diagnosis. Hagerstown, MD: Harper & Row; 1980. gaze across at things rather than merely looking up at them, opening up a new visual range. They can begin taking food from a spoon. At the same time, maturation of the visual system allows greater depth perception. In this period, infants achieve stable state regulation and regular sleep- wake cycles. Total sleep requirements are approximately 14-16 hours per 24 hours, with about 9-10 hours concentrated at night and 2 naps per day. Approximately 70% of infants sleep for a 6-8 hour stretch by age 6 months (see Fig. 23.2). By 4-6 months, the sleep electroencephalogram shows a mature pattern, with demarcation of rapid eye movement and three stages of non-rapid eye movement sleep. The sleep cycle remains shorter than in adults (50-60 minutes vs approximately 90 minutes). As a result, infants arouse to light sleep or wake frequently during the night, setting the stage for behavioral sleep problems (see Chapter 31). Cognitive Development The overall effect of these developments is a qualitative change. At 4 months of ge, infant word bring a thing, in so cia lyne mins exclusively on the mother, but become distracted. In the mother's arms, the infant may literally turn around, preferring to face outward. 

Table 23.3 Time of Radiographic Appearance of Centers of Ossification in Infancy and Childhood MALES: FEMALES: AGE AT BONES AND EPIPHYSEAL AGE AT APPEARANCE* CENTERS APPEARANCE* HUMERUS, HEAD 3wk 3wk CARPAL BONES 2mo + 2mo Capitate 2mo + 2 mo 3mo ‡ 2mo Hamate 2mo + 2 mo 30 mo $ 16 mo Triangulart 21 mo ‡ 14 mo 42 mo ÷ 19 mo Lunate 34 mo ÷ 13 mo 67 mo ‡ 19 mo Trapezium 47 mo ‡ 14 mo 69 mo ‡ 15 mo Trapezoidi 49 mo ‡ 12 mo 66 mo # 15 mo Scaphoidt 51 mo ‡ 12 mo No standards Pisiformt No standards available available METACARPAL BONES 18 mo ‡ 5 mo 12 mo ‡ 3 mo 20 mo ‡ 5mo I|I| 13 mo ‡ 3 mo 23 mo $ 6mo IV 15 mo ≤ 4 mo 26 mo ‡ 7 mo V 16 mo ‡ 5 mo 32 mo ÷ 9 mo 18 mo $ 5 mo FINGERS (EPIPHYSES) 16 mo + 4 mo 16 mo ÷ 4 mo 17 mo 5 mo 19 mo ‡ 7 mo 21 mo ‡ 5 mo 24 mo ÷ 6 mo 24 mo ÷ 6mo 26 mo 6mo 28 mo ÷ 6 mo 28 mo $ 6mo 32 mo ÷ 7 mo 37 mo ÷ 9 mo 37 mo ÷ 8 mo 39 mo ‡ 10 mo 152 mo ‡ 18 mo Proximal phalanx, 3rd finger Proximal phalanx, 2nd finger Proximal phalanx, 4th finger Distal phalanx, 1st finger Proximal phalanx, 5th finger Middle phalanx, 3rd finger Middle phalanx, 4th finger Middle phalanx, 2nd finger Distal phalanx, 3rd finger Distal phalanx, 4th finger Proximal phalanx, 1st finger Distal phalanx, 5th finger Distal phalanx, 2nd finger Middle phalanx, 5th finger Sesamoid (adductor pollicis) 10 mo ‡ 3 mo 11 mo ÷ 3mo 11 mo ‡ 3 mo 12 mo ÷ 4 mo 14 mo ÷ 4 mo 15 mo ÷ 5 mo 15 mo $ 5 mo 16 mo $ 5 mo 18 mo ÷ 4 mo 18 mo $ 5 mo 20 mo ÷ 5 mo 23 mo ÷ 6 mo 23 mo ‡ 6 mo 22 mo ‡ 7 mo 121 mo ‡ 13 mo HIP AND KNEE Usually present Femur, distal at birth Usually present Tibia, proximal at birth 4 mo + 2mo 46 mo ‡ 11 mo Femur, head Patella Usually present at birth Usually present at birth 4 mo ‡ 2 mo 29 mo ÷ 7 mo FOOT AND ANKLE: *To nearest month. Except for the capitate and hamate bones, the variability of carpal centers is too great to make them very useful clinically. #Standards for the foot are available, but normal variation is wide, including some familial variants, so this area is of little clinical use. Values represent mean ‡ standard deviation, when applicable. The norms present a composite of published data from the Fels Research Institute, Yellow Springs, OH (Pyle SI, Sontag L. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1943, 49:102), and unpublished data from the Brush Foundation, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, and the Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA. Compiled by Lieb, Buehl, and Pyle. Infants at this age also explore their own bodies, staring intently at their hands; vocalizing; blowing bubbles; and touching their ears, cheeks, and genitals. These explorations represent an early stage in the understanding of cause and effect as infants learn that voluntary muscle movements generate predictable tactile and visual sensations. Learn- ing and memory involving the hippocampus can be demonstrated at 3 months. These activities have a role in the emergence of a sense of self, separate from the parents. This is the first stage of personality Chapter 23 • The First Year 155 2 Age 1 wk 1 mo 3 то 6 mo 9 mo 12 mo 18 mo 2yr 3 yr 4 yr 5 yr 6 yr 7 yr 8 yr 9 yr 10 yr 11 yr 12 yr 13 yr 14 yr 15 yr 16 yr 17 yr 18 yr 4 6 Hours of sleep 8 10, 12 14 Nighttime sleep Daytime sleep* *Divided into typical number of naps per day. Length of naps may be quite variable. 16 Total hours of sleep 16.5 15.5 15 14.25 14 13.75 13.5 13 12 11.50 11 10.75 10.50 10.25 10 9.75 9.50 9.25 9.25 9 8.75 8.50 8.25 8.25 2 4 6 8 Fig. 23.2 Typical sleep requirements in children. (From Ferber R. Solve Your Child's Sleep Problems, New York: Simon & Schuster; 1985.) development. Infants come to associate certain sensations through fre- quent repetition. The proprioceptive feeling of holding up the hand and wiggling the fingers always accompanies the sight of the fingers mov- ing. Such "self" sensations are consistently linked and reproducible at will. In contrast, sensations that are associated with "other" occur with less regularity and in varying combinations. The sound, smell, and feel of the parent sometimes appear promptly in response to crying, but sometimes do not. The satisfaction that the mother or another loving adult provides continues the process of attachment. Emotional Development and Communication Babies interact with increasing sophistication and range. They have an innate ability for facial expressions that, over time, become the func- tional expressions of emotion (anger, joy, interest, fear, disgust, and surprise). Infants can discriminate and imitate facial expressions, when paired with vocalizations, of adults as well as other infants. Initiating games (singing, hand games) increases social development. Such face- to-face behavior reveals the infant's ability to share emotional states, the first step in the development of communication. Infants of depressed parents show a different pattern, spending less time in coordinated movement with their parents and making fewer efforts to reengage. Rather than anger, they show sadness and a loss of energy when the parents continue to be unavailable. Implications for Parents and Pediatricians Motor and sensory maturation makes infants at 3-6 months exciting and interactive. Some parents experience their 4-month-old child's outward turning as a rejection, secretly fearing that their infants no longer love them. For most parents, this is a happy period and they may excitedly report that they can hold conversations with their infants, taking turns vocalizing and listening. Pediatricians share in the enjoyment, as the baby coos, makes eye contact, and moves rhythmically. Infants who do not show this reciprocal language and movements are at risk for autism spectrum disorder or other developmental disabilities (see Chapters 56 and 58). If this visit does not feel joyful and relaxed, causes such as social 

156 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior stress, family dysfunction, parental mental illness, or problems in the infant-parent relationship should be considered. Parents can be reas sured that responding to an infant's emotional needs cannot spoil the infant. Giving vaccines and drawing blood while the child is seated on the parents lap or nursing at the breast increases pain tolerance. AGE 6-12 MONTHS With achievement of the sitting position, increased mobility, and new skills to explore the world around them, 6-12 month old infants show advances in cognitive understanding and communication, and new tensions arise in regard to attachment and separation. Infants develop will and intentions, characteristics that most parents welcome but still find challenging to manage. Physical Development Growth slows more (see Table 27.1 and Figs. 24.1 and 24.2). By the first birthday, birthweight has tripled, length has increased by 50%, and head circumference has increased by 10 cm (4 in). The ability to sit unsupported (6-7 months) and to pivot while sitting (around 9-10 months) provides increasing opportunities to manipulate several objects at a time and to experiment with novel combinations of objects. These explorations are aided by the emergence of a thumb-finger grasp (8-9 months) and a neat pincer grasp by 12 months. Voluntary release emerges at 9 months. Many infants begin crawling and pulling to stand around 8 months, followed by cruising. Some walk by 1 year. Motor achievements correlate with increasing myelinization and cerebellar growth. These gross motor skills expand infants' exploratory range and create new physical dangers, as well as opportunities for learning. Tooth eruption occurs, usually starting with the mandibular central incisors. Tooth development (see Table 353.1) reflects skeletal matura- tion and bone age, although there is wide individual variation. Cognitive Development The 6-month-old infant has discovered his hands and will soon learn to manipulate objects. At first, everything is mouthed. In time, novel objects are picked up, inspected, passed from hand to hand, banged, dropped, and then mouthed. Each action represents a nonverbal idea about what things are for (in Piagetian terms, a schema; see Chapter 19). The com- plexity of an infant's play, how many different schemata are brought to bear, is a useful index of cognitive development at this age. The pleasure, persistence, and energy with which infants tackle these challenges sug- gest the existence of an intrinsic drive or mastery motivation. Mastery behavior occurs when infants feel secure; those with less secure attach- ments show limited experimentation and less competence. A major milestone is the achievement by 9 months of object perma- nence (constancy), the understanding that objects continue to exist, even when not seen. At 4-7 months of age, infants look down for a yarn ball that has been dropped but quickly give up if it is not seen. With object constancy, older infants persist in searching. They will find objects hidden under a cloth or behind the examiner's back. Peek-a-boo brings unlimited pleasure as the child magically brings back the other player. Events seem to occur as a result of the child's own activities. Emotional Development The advent of object permanence corresponds with qualitative changes in social and communicative development. Infants look back and forth between an approaching stranger and a parent and may cling or cry anxiously, demonstrating stranger anxiety. Separations often become more difficult. Infants who have been sleeping through the night for months begin to awaken regularly and cry, as though remembering that the parents are nearby or in the next room (see Chapter 31). A new demand for autonomy also emerges. Poor weight gain at this age often reflects a struggle between an infant's emerging inde- pendence and parent's control of the feeding situation. Use of the two- spoon method of feeding (one for the child and one for the parent), finger foods, and a high chair with tray table can avert potential prob- lems. lantrums make their hrst appearance as the drives for autonomy and mastery come in conflict with parental controls and the infant's still-limited abilities. Infants at 7 months of age are adept at nonverbal communication, expressing a range of emotions and responding to vocal tone and facial expressions. At about 9 months of age infants become aware that emotions can be shared between people; they show parents toys as a way of sharing their happy feelings. Between 8 and 10 months of age, babbling takes on a new complexity, with multisyllabic sounds ("ba-da-ma") called canonical babbling. Babies can discriminate between languages. Infants in bilingual homes learn the characteris- tics and rules that govern two different languages. Social interaction (attentive adults taking turns vocalizing with the infant) profoundly influences the acquisition and production of new sounds. The first true word (i.e., a sound used consistently to refer to a specific object or person) appears in concert with an infant's discovery of object permanence. Picture books now provide an ideal context for ver- bal language acquisition. With a familiar book as a shared focus of attention, a parent and child engage in repeated cycles of pointing and labeling, with elaboration and feedback by the parent. Often infants learn a gesture to communicate before the can say the word (e.g., waving bye-bye before saying "bye-bye"), and there is limited evidence that the addition of sign language may support infant development while enhancing parent-infant communication. Implications for Parents and Pediatricians With the developmental reorganization that occurs around 9 months of age, previously resolved issues of feeding and sleeping reemerge. Pedia- tricians can prepare parents at the 6 month visit so that these problems can be understood as the result of developmental progress and not regression. Parents should be encouraged to plan ahead for necessary, and inevitable, separations (e.g., babysitter, daycare). Routine prepara- tions may make these separations easier. Dual parent employment has not been consistently found to be harmful or beneficial for long-term cognitive or social-emotional outcomes. Introduction of a transitional object may allow the infant to self-comfort in the parents' absence. The object cannot have any potential for asphyxiation or strangulation. Infants' wariness of strangers often makes the 9 month examination dif- ficult, particularly if the infant is temperamentally prone to react negatively to unfamiliar situations. Initially, the pediatrician should avoid direct eye contact with the child. Time spent talking with the parent and introducing the child to a small, washable toy will be rewarded with more coopera- tion. The examination can be continued on the parents lap when feasible. Encourage parents to read, play, and communicate with their infant. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 23.1 Infant Crying and Colic Mutiat T. Onigbanjo and Susan Feigelman Crying or fussiness is present in all babies but reaches medical atten- tion in about 20% of infants younger than 2 months. Although usually a transient and normal infant behavior, crying is often associated with parental concern and distress. On average, babies cry 2 hours per day, peaking at 6 weeks of age. Premature infants will have peak crying at 6 weeks corrected age (Fig. 23.3). Small-for-gestational-age and prema- ture babies may be at higher risk. The peak period of infant crying usu- ally occurs in the evenings and early part of the night. Excessive crying or fussiness persisting longer than 3-5 months may be associated with behavioral problems in an older child (anxiety, aggression, hyperactiv- ity), decreased duration of breastfeeding, or postnatal depression, but it is uncertain which is the cause or effect. Most infants with crying/ fussiness do not have gastrosophageal reflux, lactose intolerance, con- stipation, or cow's milk protein allergy. Acute-onset uncontrollable crying could be caused by a medical condition. Potentially overlooked conditions to consider include cor- neal abrasion, tourniquet effect of a hair wrapped around a digit or 

180 160 - 140 20 Minutes/day distress 60 40 20 w2 W3 W4 w5 w6 W7 W8 w9 w10 w11 w12 Recording week Fig. 23.3 Crying amounts and patterns from three North American studies illustrating similarities in crying pattern. (From Barr RG, Trent RB, Cross J. Age-related incidence curve of hospitalized shaken baby syndrome cases: convergent evidence for crying as a trigger to shaking. Child Abuse Negl. 2006;30:7-16.) penis, occult fracture, urinary tract infection, acute abdomen including inguinal hernia, or anomalous coronary artery. Breastfeeding mothers should be asked about medications, drugs, and diet. Gastrointestinal distress can result from a maternal diet high in cruciferous vegetables. Most of the time, the etiology of a serious problem can be discovered with a careful history and physical examination. Crying is a normal part of neurobehavioral development. Infants have various signals for their needs and for getting attention from a caregiver. These behaviors progressively increase in intensity in many infants, from changes in breathing and color, to postural and movement changes, and then to calm vocalizations. These precry cues, if not attended to, will eventually lead to active crying. Some infants may go directly to crying. perhaps based on temperament; these infants may be less easily consol- able, more intense, or more responsive to sensory stimuli. Management of crying/fussiness should include teaching caregivers about precry cues and responding to the signal for feeding in a calm, relaxed manner. If sen- sory overstimulation is a factor, creating a nondistracting, calm environ- ment may help, as well as swaddling. When lack of sensory stimulation is present, parent-infant skin-to-skin contact and carrying the infant may be beneficial. In all situations, reassurance that this is both normal and transient, with only 5% of infants persisting beyond 3 months of age, helps the family cope. Teaching families about expectations for normal crying behavior can reduce emergency department visits. The emotional significance of any experience depends on both the individual child's temperament and the parent's responses (see Table 19.1); differing feeding schedules produce differing reactions. Hunger generates increasing tension; as the urgency peaks, the infant cries, the parent offers the breast or bottle, and the tension dissipates. Infants fed "on demand" consistently experience this link among their distress, the arrival of the parent, and relief from hunger. Most infants fed on a fixed schedule quickly adapt their hunger cycle to the schedule. Those who cannot adapt, because they are temperamentally prone to irregu- lar biologic rhythms, experience periods of unrelieved hunger as well as unwanted feedings when they already feel full. Similarly, infants who are fed at the parents' convenience, with neither attention to the infant's hunger cues nor a fixed schedule, may not consistently experi- ence feeding as the pleasurable reduction of tension. Infants with early dysregulation often show increased irritability and physiologic insta- bility (spitting, diarrhea, poor weight gain) as well as later behavioral problems. Infants with excess crying after 4-6 months may have neu- robehavioral dysregulation and may be at higher risk of other behavior problems (sleep, behavior, feeding). Colic is characterized by the "rule of 3." It occurs in a healthy, thriving infant beginning in the second or third week of life with crying that lasts at Chapter 23 • The First Year 157 least 3 hours per day, occurs at least 3 days per week, lasts for more than 3 weeks, and resolves by 3 or 4 months of age. It is equally common in breast- fed and bottle-fed infants, although prevalence is variable (up to 20%). There is no racial, socioeconomic status, or gender risk for colic. Colic is a diagnosis of exclusion following a careful history and physical exami- nation. Few cases will be found to have an organic etiology. Although all babies have crying episodes, colicky babies cry excessively and are difficult to settle. The fussiness is not associated with hunger or any other form of discomfort. Colicky babies may be more reactive to the same stimulus and may cry louder than other babies. Although crying periods are a nor- mal developmental phenomenon, babies with colic can cause parents to become anxious, distraught, frustrated, and sleep deprived. Mothers are at higher risk for postpartum depression if they report inconsolable crying episodes lasting more than 20 minutes. Depression may lead to cessation of breastfeeding. The risk of abuse increases as frustrated parents may use aggressive means in an attempt to quiet the child, resulting in the shaken baby syndrome. There is no specific treatment for colic, but practitioners should pro- vide advice and reassurance to parents. Parents must be counseled about the problem, the importance of implementing a series of calm, systematic steps to soothe the infant, and having a plan for stress relief, such as time- out for parents and substitute caregivers. Parents can be advised that colic is self-limited with no adverse effects on the child. Public health programs, such as the Period of PURPLE Crying (http://purplecrying.info/) and Take 5 Safety Plan for Crying, are invaluable tools for parents. These pro- grams inform parents that all babies go through periods of crying, deflect- ing parental guilt and self-recrimination. Most importantly, parents are reminded that it is better to allow the baby to cry than engage in shaking that leads to head trauma. Although babies with colic will have inconsol- able periods when there is no relief, parents can try some simple steps. Predictable daily schedules may help, ensuring the baby has adequate sleep. Parents should provide appropriate stimulation throughout the day when baby is in an alert/awake period. The sleep environment should be free of stimulation. Swaddling, rocking, white noise, and movement (eg., stroller, car ride) help some babies settle. Infants who are carried by a par- ent show different physiologic changes than when held in a sitting posi- tion, although there is no evidence that continuous carrying is effective in colic management. A study in a hunter-gatherer society showed that chil- dren who are continuously carried by their mothers display similar crying periods as those in Western societies. Some studies have found differences in fecal microflora (dysbio- sis) between babies with excess crying and controls. Results include fewer bifidobacteria and lactobacilli and more coliform bacteria such as Escherichia coli. None has been conclusive, however, and each study was found to have limitations such as lack of precise inclusion criteria, lack of blinded observers, and variability in outcome measurements. If the child appears to have gastrointestinal symptoms, breastfeeding mothers may try elimination of milk, beans, and cruciferous vegetables from their diets. In allergic families, mothers may try a stricter elimina- tion of food allergens (milk, egg, wheat, nuts, soy, and fish), although nutritional status should be monitored. For formula-fed infants, changing from milk-based to soy-based or other lactose-free formulas had no effect in most studies. A protein hydrolysate formula may moderately improve symptoms. The cause of colic in not known, and no medical intervention has been consistently effective. Colic has been described as a "functional gastro- intestinal disorder" and has been associated with maternal migraines, as well as later development of migraine in the child. Simethicone has not been shown to be better than placebo. Anticholinergic medications should not be used in infants younger than 6 months. Early studies of probiotics look promising, but evidence is insufficient to recommend their routine use. Among various complementary therapies, certain herbal teas, sugar solutions, Gripe water (containing herbal supple- ments), chamomile and fennel extract may have benefit, but the evidence is weak. Baby massage may be helpful, but chiropractic manipulation should not be performed in young children. Acupuncture was effective in one trial and singing while in utero may produce babies who cry less. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

158 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Chapter 24 The Second Year Rebecca G. Carter and Susan Feigelman The second year of life is a time of rapid growth and development, par- ticularly in the realms of social-emotional and cognitive skills as well as motor development. The toddler's newly found ability to walk allows separation and independence; however, the toddler continues to need secure attachment to the parents. At approximately 18 months of age, the emergence of symbolic thought and language causes a reorganization of behavior, with implications across many developmental domains. AGE 12-18 MONTHS Physical Development Although overall rate of growth continues to decline, the toddler continues to experience considerable brain growth and myelination in the second year of life, resulting in an increase in head circumference of 2 cm over the year (Figs. 24.1 and 24.2). Toddlers have relatively short legs and long torsos, with exaggerated lumbar lordosis and protruding abdomens. Most children begin to walk independently at about 12-15 months of age. Early walking is not associated with advanced development in other domains. Infants initially toddle with a wide-based gait, with the knees bent and the arms flexed at the elbow; the entire torso rotates with each stride; the toes may point in or out, and the feet strike the floor flat. The appearance is that of genu varum (bowleg). Subsequent refinement leads to greater steadiness and energy efficiency. After several months of prac- tice, the center of gravity shifts back and the torso stabilizes, while the knees extend and the arms swing at the sides for balance. The feet are held in better alignment, and the child is able to stop, pivot, and stoop without toppling over (see Chapters 713 and 714). Cognitive Development Exploration of the environment increases in parallel with improved dexterity (reaching, grasping, releasing) and mobility. Learning follows the precepts of Piaget's sensorimotor stage (see Chapter 19). Toddlers manipulate objects in novel ways to create interesting effects, such as stacking blocks or filling and dumping buckets. Playthings are also more likely to be used for their intended purposes (combs for hair, cups for drinking). Imitation of parents and older siblings or other children is an important mode of learning. Make-believe play (symbolic play) centers on the child's own body, such as pretending to drink from an empty cup (Table 24.1; see also Table 23.1). Emotional Development Infants who are approaching the developmental milestone of taking their first steps may be irritable. Once they start walking, their predominant mood changes markedly. Toddlers are often elated with their new ability and with the power to control the distance between themselves and their parents. Exploring toddlers will orbit around their trusted adults, moving away and then returning for a reassuring touch before moving away again. A child with secure attachment will use the trusted adult as a secure base from which to explore independently. Proud of their accomplishments, the child illustrates Erikson's stage of autonomy and separation (see Chapter 19). The toddler who is overly controlled and discouraged from active exploration may feel doubt, shame, anger, and insecurity. All chil- dren will experience tantrums, reflecting their inability to delay gratifica- tion, suppress or displace anger, or verbally communicate their emotional states. Children may form secure attachments with parents as well as other trusted adults, thereby reinforcing the value of quality childcare if parents are employed out of the home. Linguistic Development Receptive language precedes expressive language. By the time infants speak their first words around 12 months of age, they already respond appropriately to several simple statements, such as "no," "bye-bye," and "give me.' By 15 months, the average child points to major body parts and uses four to six words spontaneously and correctly. Toddlers also enjoy polysyllabic jargoning (see Tables 23.1 and 24.1) and do not seem upset that no one understands. Most communication of wants and ideas continues to be nonverbal (e.g., by pointing, facial expressions). Implications for Parents and Pediatricians Parents who cannot recall any other milestone tend to remember when their child began to walk, perhaps because of the symbolic significance of walking as an act of independence and because of the new demands that the ambulating toddler places on the parent. All toddlers should be encouraged to explore their environment; however, a childs ability to wan- der out of sight also increases the risks of injury and the need for supervi- sion, making recommendations regarding childproofing an integral focus of physician visits. Parents must understand the importance of exploration. Rather than limiting movement, parents should place toddlers in safe environments or substitute one activity for another. In the ofhce setting, many toddlers are comfortable exploring the examination room, but cling to the par- ents under the stress of the examination. Children who become more, not less, distressed in their parents arms or who avoid their parents at times of stress may be insecurely attached. Young children who, when distressed, turn to strangers rather than parents for comfort are particu- larly worrisome. Children raised in environments with extreme and/or chronic levels of stress (toxic stress) have increased vulnerability to dis- ease that continues into adulthood (see Chapter 1). These effects can be mediated by fostering elements of resiliency including introduction of a supportive or encouraging trusted adult. The conflicts between inde- pendence and security manifest in issues of discipline, temper tantrums, toilet training, and changing feeding behaviors. Parents should be coun seled on these matters within the framework of normal development. Parents may express concern about poor food intake as growth slows. The growth chart should provide reassurance. Many children still take two daytime naps, although the duration steadily decreases and may start to condense to one longer nap (see Fig. 23.2). AGE 18-24 MONTHS Physical Development Motor development during this period is reflected in improvements in balance and agility and the emergence of running and stair climbing. Height and weight increase at a steady rate during this year, with a gain of 5 in and 5 lb. By 24 months, children are about half their ultimate adult height. Head growth slows slightly, with 85% of adult head cir- cumference achieved by age 2 years, leaving only an additional 5 cm (2 in) gain over the next few years (see Fig. 24.1 and Table 27.1). Cognitive Development At approximately 18 mo of age, several cognitive changes coalesce, mark- ing the conclusion of the sensorimotor period. These can be observed during self-initiated play. Object permanence, which was first demon- strated around 9 months of age (see Chapter 23), is now firmly estab- lished; toddlers anticipate where an object will end up, even though the object was not visible while it was being moved. Cause and effect are bet- ter understood, and toddlers demonstrate flexibility in problem solving (e.g., using a stick to obtain a toy that is out of reach, figuring out how to wind a mechanical toy). Symbolic transformations in play are no longer tied to the toddler's own body; thus a doll can be "fed" from an empty plate. As with the reorganization that occurs at 9 months (see Chapter 23), the cognitive changes at 18 months correlate with important changes in the emotional and linguistic domains (see Table 24.1). Emotional Development The relative independence of the preceding half-year often gives way to increased clinginess at about 18 months. This stage, described as "rap- prochement, may be a reaction to growing awareness of the possibility of separation. Many parents report that they cannot go anywhere without having a small child attached to them. Separation anxiety will manifest at bedtime. Many children use a special blanket or stuffed toy as a transi- tional object, which functions as a symbol of the absent parent. The tran- sitional object remains important until the transition to symbolic thought 

H D R Y ш Z0 ш W ш - G Chapter 24 • The Second Year 159 Birth to 24 months: Boys Head circumference-for-age and Weight-for-length percentiles NAME RECORD # Birth In_ Ecm= 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 = cm=_in. EAGE (MONTHS) L Ц =527 = 52= D 20 - =50₴ 19- £483 18-463 598₴ E95 = 90 =75 = 50 ₽ =25 = 10| = 5 -20 - =50₴ R =48=19- U M =46=-18- E R =443 17- = 443 = 17- N =423 16- =40₴ •15=38 ₴ - 14==36: -98 95 :90 :24 TiTT 23 :22 |||| N :20 = :193 18= E = 343 13 171 =327 12- =30= 161 :15 = :143 13| W E 28 26=12= -24-117 22-=10= 20- -93 18- - 8 - 16- 14 = 7 :6 12- = 5 10 4 8- 6 3 4 = 2 1 _kg cm 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 in 118 19 20 21 22 23 24 :12 11E = 10 ₴ 9 8 G H T 6= 5 = LENGTH $ 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 7880 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00102104106108110 cm 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 in Date Age Weight Length Head Circ. Comment Published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, November 1, 2009 SOURCE: WHO Child Growth Standards (http://www.who.int/childgrowth/en) CDC А Fig. 24.1 World Health Organization growth charts. A, Weight for length and head circumference for age for boys, birth to 24 months. B, Weight for length and head circumference for age for girls, birth to 24 months. (Courtesy World Health Organization: WHO Child Growth Standards, 2021.) 

160 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Birth to 24 months: Girls Head circumference-for-age and Weight-for-length percentiles Birth 3 6 9 Lin =cm= NAME RECORD # H D TS CO E R mOZm W E G T 12 15 18 21 24 =cm=_in AGE (MONTHS)E =52₴ =52= 20 -20 - =50 ₽ 19 =48 $ £46 ₴ 18 598 ₴ =95 = 90 = 75: 550 = 25 : 10: = 50₴ =48=19 - =46 =-18 £447 17 =443 -171 =42= 16 40 ₴ 15 =383 = 36 ₴ 14 =34 ₴ 13 = 32 7 12- =30 ₴ 28 •26 12÷ 24 117 22-=10 20- 18- • 16 -14 12 10 9 = 8 =7= 6 :5 4 8 3 6 4 2 5=24= - 52- = 23 ₴ 50- = 22= 48- =21 ₴46 - -98 = 20₴ - 44- :19 ₴ -42 - = 18 ÷40- 17₴38- -36 - = 16 ₴ - 34- : 15 ÷14₴ - 32- -30 - :13 ÷-28- = 12= - 26 - :11 =-24 - = 10 # 22- 9 +20 - 8 - 18- 7= [-16 - -14 -I :6 = 12- 5 LENGTH = kg= 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 8 8 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100102104106108110 Cm 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 in Date Age Weight Length Head Circ. Comment 11 = kg = 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 in 118 19 20 21 22 23 24 Published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, November 1, 2009 SOURCE: WHO Child Growth Standards (http://www.who.int/childgrowth/en) CDC B Fig. 24.1, cont'd H R CO M m 70 N W E G T 

Birth to 24 months: Boys Length-for-age and Weight-for-age percentiles Birth 3 6 9 12 - in - -cm| -100 - -AGE (MONTHS) - 95 NAME 15 18 Chapter 24 • The Second Year 161 RECORD # 21 987 1951 - 907 751 50T [251 =101 24 41 cm- in + 100 -- - 39- = 38- 95 = 37- = 36- • 90- = 35- F34- - 18-40- -17÷387 - 36- -16-1 34- -15- 32- -14- 30- -13- - 28- -12- 26- 11-24- -10- 22- -9=20- 8=18- - 16= L N G T H W E G H T А -16- -14 -12 -10 - 8 - 6 55 50 - 45 40 8 7 6 5 4- 3- 298 95 190 = 757 550₽ ÷25 - 10₴ 57 - 27 9 Mother's Stature Father's Stature Date Age Birth AGE (MONTHS) - 12 = # 15 = [ 18 Gestational Age: Weeks Weight Length Head Circ. 21 24 Comment 2 Ib kg Birth 3 Published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, November 1, 2009 SOURCE: WHO Child Growth Standards (http://www.who.int/childgrowth/en) W G H T SAFER • HEALTHIER PEOPLE™ CDC Fig. 24.2 World Health Organization growth charts. A, Length for age and weight for age for boys, birth to 24 months. B, Length for age and weight for age for girls, birth to 24 months. (Courtesy World Health Organization: WHO Child Growth Standards, 2021.) 

162 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior N W Birth to 24 months: Girls Length-for-age and Weight-for-age percentiles Birth 3 6 9 12 - in - cm - 39₴ -100 -AGE (MONTHS)- - 38= -95 -37 - 36= 90 - - 35= - 34 •85 - 33 - 32 •80 - 31 - 30 75- -29 - 28 70 -27 26 -25 65 - 241 23 60 -22 55 •21 20= 50 19 18 45 •17 16=1 40 - - 15 -16 -14 -12 -10* 8 6 8 7 6 5 4 3- 9 Mother's Stature Father's Stature Date Age Birth 2 Ib kg Birth Published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, November 1, 2009 SOURCE: WHO Child Growth Standards (http://www.who.int/childgrowth/en) Fig. 24.2, cont'd NAME 15 18 RECORD # 21 98- 95- F901 +751 : 50÷ =251 -10= 5= 981 195₫ 190 751 =507 - 25- +10° = 51 = 2 24 41 ст - in 100 = 39- = 38- 95- = 37- = 36- 90- - 35- - 34- - 18≤407 =17=38- •36- _16- 34- 15- 32- -14- 30- -13- 28- - 12- 26- 11-24- -10- - 22- 9—20- 8{18- 16- _ AGE (MONTHS) = = 12 I = 15 = 18 Gestational Age: Weight Length 21 Weeks Head Circ. 24 Comment CDC G T H W E G T 

Table 24.1 Emerging Patterns of Behavior from 1-5 Years of Age 15 MO Motor: Adaptive: Language: Social: 18 MO Motor: Adaptive: Language: Social: 24 MO Motor: Adaptive: Language: Social: 30 MO Motor: Adaptive: Language: Social: 36 MO Motor: Adaptive: Language: Social: 48 МО Motor: Adaptive: Language: Social: Walks alone; crawls up stairs Makes tower of 3 cubes; makes a line with crayon; inserts raisin in bottle Jargon; follows simple commands; may name a familiar object (e.g., ball); responds to his/her name Indicates some desires or needs by pointing; hugs Runs stiffly; sits on small chair; walks up stairs with 1 hand held; explores drawers and wastebaskets Makes tower of 4 cubes; imitates scribbling; imitates vertical stroke; dumps raisin from bottle 10 words (average); names pictures; identifies 1 or more parts of body Feeds self; seeks help when in trouble; may complain when wet or soiled; kisses parent with pucker Runs well, walks up and down stairs, 1 step at a time; opens doors; climbs on furniture; jumps Makes tower of 7 cubes (6 at 21 mo); scribbles in circular pattern; imitates horizontal stroke; folds paper once imitatively Puts 3 words together (subject, verb, object) Handles spoon well; often tells about immediate experiences; helps to undress; listens to stories when shown pictures Goes up stairs alternating feet Makes tower of 9 cubes; makes vertical and horizontal strokes, but generally will not join them to make cross; imitates circular stroke, forming closed figure Refers to self by pronoun "I"; knows full name Helps put things away; pretends in play Rides tricycle; stands momentarily on 1 foot Makes tower of 10 cubes; imitates construction of "bridge" of 3 cubes; copies circle; imitates cross Knows age and gender; counts 3 objects correctly; repeats 3 numbers or a sentence of 6 syllables; most of speech intelligible to strangers Plays simple games (in "parallel" with other children); helps in dressing (unbuttons clothing and puts on shoes); washes hands Hops on 1 foot; throws ball overhand; uses scissors to cut out pictures; climbs well Copies bridge from model; imitates construction of "gate" of 5 cubes; copies cross and square; draws man with 2-4 parts besides head; identifies longer Counts 4 pennies accurately; tells story Plays with several children, with beginning of socia interaction and role-playing; goes to toilet alone 60 MO Motor: Adaptive: Language: Skips Draws triangle from copy; names heavier of 2 weights Names 4 colors; repeats sentence of 10 syllables; counts 10 pennies correctly Social: Dresses and undresses; asks questions about meaning of words; engages in domestic role-playing Data derived from those of Gesell (as revised by Knobloch), Shirley, Provence, Wolf, Bailey, and others. After 6yr, the Wechsler Intelligence Scales for Children (WISC-IV) and other scales offer the most precise estimates of cognitive development. To have their greatest value, they should be administered only by an experienced and qualified person. Chapter 24 • The Second Year 163 has been completed and the symbolic presence of the parent fully internal- ized. Despite the attachment to the parent, the child's use of "no" is a way of declaring independence. Individual differences in temperament, in both the child and the parents, play a critical role in determining the balance of conflict vs cooperation in the parent-child relationship. As effective lan- guage emerges, conflicts often become less frequent. Self-conscious awareness and internalized standards of behavior first appear at this age. Toddlers looking in a mirror will, for the first time, reach for their own face rather than the mirror image if they notice something unusual on their nose. They begin to recognize when toys are broken and may hand them to their parents to fix. Language becomes a means of impulse control, early reasoning, and connection between ideas. When tempted to touch a forbidden object, they may tell themselves "no, no." This is the very beginning of the formation of a conscience. The fact that they often go on to touch the object anyway demonstrates the relative weakness of internalized inhibitions at this stage. Linguistic Development Perhaps the most dramatic developments in this period are linguistic. Labeling of objects coincides with the advent of symbolic thought. After the realization occurs that words can stand for objects or ideas, a childs vocabulary grows from 10-15 words at 18 months to between 50 and 100 at 2 years. After acquiring a vocabulary of about 50 words, toddlers begin to combine them to make simple sentences, marking the beginning of grammar. At this stage, toddlers understand two-step commands, such as "Give me the ball and then get your shoes." Language also gives the tod- dler a sense of control over the surroundings, as in "night-night" or "bye- bye." The emergence of verbal language marks the end of the sensorimotor period. As toddlers learn to use symbols to express ideas and solve prob- lems, the need for cognition based on direct sensation and motor manipu- lation wanes. Implications for Parents and Pediatricians With children's increasing mobility, physical limits on their explorations become less effective; words become increasingly important for behavior control as well as cognition. Children with delayed language acquisition often have greater behavior problems and frustrations due to problems with communication. Language development is facilitated when parents and caregivers use clear, simple sentences; ask questions; pause to allow time to process and generate verbal responses and respond to children's incomplete sentences and gestural communication with the appropriate words. Television and distracted screen-time viewing, as well as television as background noise, decreases parent-child verbal interactions, whereas looking at picture books and engaging the child in two-way conversa- tions stimulates language development. In the world of constant access to tablets, phones, and screens, parents and children have more distractions from direct language engagement. Even educational programing needs to be limited on screens to reinforce face-to-face contact with caregivers dur- ing language acquisition; solo media use should be avoided in this age. As an introduction to this topic, the provider can ask "What are your child's favorite activities?" and "What activities do you like to do with your child?" Performing most of the physical examination in the parent's lap may help allay fears of separation and stranger anxiety. Avoid direct eye contact initially and introduce all tools used during the exam such as the otoscope for the patient to explore before use. Save the more invasive portions of the exam to the end (i.e., ears, throat, etc.). Pediatricians can help parents understand the resurgence of prob- lems with separation and the appearance of a transitional object as developmental phenomenon. Methods of discipline should be dis- cussed; effective alternatives to corporal punishment will usually be appreciated (see Chapter 20 and Tables 20.3 and 20.4). Helping par- ents to understand and adapt to their children's different tempera- mental styles can constitute an important intervention (see Table 19.1). Developing daily routines is helpful to all children at this age. Rigidity in those routines reflects a need for mastery over a changing environment. Parents should also institute systems to help prepare their child during times of transition from one activity or setting to another to help foster a sense of trust and communication. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

164 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Chapter 25 The Preschool Years Rebecca G. Carter and Susan Feigelman The emergence of language and exposure of children to an expand- ing social sphere represent the critical milestones for children age 2-5 years. As toddlers, children learn to walk away and come back to the secure adult. As preschoolers, they explore emotional separation, alter- nating between stubborn opposition and cheerful compliance, between bold exploration and clinging dependence. Increasing time spent in classrooms and playgrounds strengthens a child's ability to adapt to new rules and relationships. Emboldened by their growing array of new skills and accomplishments, preschool children also are increas- ingly cognizant of the constraints imposed on them by the adult world and their own limited abilities. STRUCTURAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE BRAIN The preschool brain experiences dramatic changes in its anatomic and physiologic characteristics, with increases in cortical area, decreases in cortical thickness, and changing cortical volume. These changes are not uniform across the brain and vary by region. Gray and white matter tis- sue properties change dramatically, including diffusion properties in the major cerebral fiber tracts. Dramatic increases occur in brain metabolic demands. In general, more brain regions are required in younger than in older children to complete the same cognitive task. This duplica- tion has been interpreted as a form of "scaffolding," which is discarded with increasing age. The preschool brain is characterized by growth and expansion of synapses that will be followed in later years by "pruning." PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT Somatic and brain growth slows by the end of the second year of life, with corresponding decreases in nutritional requirements and appetite, and the emergence of "picky" eating habits (see Table 27.1). Increases of approximately 2 kg (4-5 lb) in weight and 7-8 cm (2-3 in) in height per year are expected. Birthweight quadruples by 2.5 years of age. An average 4 year old weighs 40 lb and is 40 in tall. The head will grow only an additional 5-6 cm between ages 3 and 18 years. Current growth charts, with growth parameters, can be found on the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website (http://www.cdc.gov/growt hcharts/) and in Chapter 27. Children with early adiposity rebound (increase in body mass index) are at increased risk for adult obesity. The preschooler has genu valgum (knock-knees) and mild pes pla- nus (flatfoot). The torso slims as the legs lengthen. Growth of sexual organs is commensurate with somatic growth. Physical energy peaks, and the need for sleep declines to 11-13 hours per 24 hours, with the child eventually dropping the nap (see Fig. 23.2). Visual acuity reaches 20/30 by age 4 years and 20/20 by school age. All 20 primary teeth have erupted by 3 years of age (see Chapter 353). Most children walk with a mature gait and run steadily before the end of their third year (see Table 24.1). Beyond this basic level, there is wide variation in ability as the range of motor activities expands to include throwing, catching, and kicking balls; riding on bicycles; climbing on playground structures; dancing; and other complex pat- tern behaviors. Stylistic features of gross motor activity, such as tempo, intensity, and cautiousness, also vary significantly. Although toddlers may walk with different styles, toe walking should not persist. The effects of such individual differences on cognitive and emotional development depend in part on the demands of the social environment and alignment with their caregivers' temperaments. Energetic, coordi- nated children may thrive emotionally with parents or teachers who encourage physical activity; lower-energy, more cerebral children may thrive with adults who value quiet play. Handedness is usually established by the third year. Frustration may result from inability to properly teach skills based on child's hand preference. Variations in fine motor development reflect both indi- vidual proclivities and different opportunities for learning. Children who are restricted from drawing with crayons, for example, develop a mature pencil grasp later. Bowel and bladder control emerge during this period, with "readi- ness" for toileting having large individual and cultural variation. Females tend to potty "train" faster and earlier than males. Bed-wetting is common up to age 5 years (see Chapter 580). Many children master toileting with ease, particularly once they are able to verbalize their bodily needs. For others, toilet training can involve a protracted power struggle. Refusal to defecate in the toilet or potty is relatively common, associated with constipation, and can lead to parental frustration. Defusing the issue with a temporary cessation of training (and a return to diapers) often allows toilet mastery to proceed. Parents should focus on positive reinforcement and avoid negative reactions during the toi- let training process. Implications for Parents and Pediatricians The normal decrease in appetite at this age may cause parental concern about nutrition; growth charts should reassure parents that the child's intake is adequate. Children normally modulate their food intake to match their somatic needs according to feelings of hunger and sati- ety. Daily intake fluctuates, at times widely, but intake over a week is relatively stable. Parents should provide a predictable eating schedule, with three meals and two snacks per day, allowing the child to choose how much to eat. This will avoid power struggles and allows the child to respond to satiety cues. However, it is important to obtain thorough diet histories for children at this age to advise parents about healthy choices and encourage physical activity to decrease long-term obesity risks and improve learning and cognitive development. Highly active children face increased risks of injury, and parents should be counseled about safety precautions. Parental concerns about possible hyperactivity may reflect inappropriate expectations, heightened fears, or true overactivity. Children who engage in ongoing impulsive activity with no apparent regard for personal safety or those harming others on a regular basis should be evaluated further. Assessment of motor skills must take into account a child's expo- sure history. Before diagnosing a motor delay based on screening tools, pediatricians should explore any limitations to a child's exposure and encourage parents to seek opportunities to work on these skills. Chil- dren should be followed closely at this age; referral to therapies should be pursued when true delays are identified given the proven benefits of early intervention. LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND PLAY These three domains all involve symbolic function, a mode of dealing with the world that emerges during the preschool period. Language Our understanding of the acquisition of language is evolving. Preschool children command significant computational skills and understanding of statistical patterns that allow them to learn about both language and causation. The 2- and 3-year-old child employs frequency distributions to identify phonetic units distinguishing words in his or her native lan- guage from other languages. Language development occurs most rapidly between 2 and 5 years of age. Vocabulary increases from 50-100 words to more than 2,000. Sentence structure advances from telegraphic phrases ("baby cry") to sentences incorporating all the major grammatical components (see Chapter 53). As a rule of thumb, between ages 2 and 5 vears. the number of words the child puts in a typical sentence should, at a minimum, equal the child's age (2 by age 2 years, 3 by age 3 years, and so on). By 21-24 months, most children are using possessives ("my ball"), progressives (the "-ing" construction, as in "I playing"), ques- tions, and negatives. By age 4 years, most children can count to 4 and use the past tense; by age 5 years, they can use the future tense. Young children do not use figurative speech; they will comprehend only the literal meaning of words. Referring to an object as "light as a feather" may produce a quizzical look on a child. 

It is important to distinguish between speech (the production of intelligible sounds) and language, which refers to the underlying men- tal act. Language includes both expressive and receptive functions. Receptive language (understanding) varies less in its rate of acquisi- tion than does expressive language; therefore it has greater prognostic importance (see Chapters 28 and 53). Language acquisition depends critically on environmental input. Key determinants include the amount and variety of speech directed toward children and the frequency with which adults ask questions and encourage verbalization. Children raised in poverty typically per- form lower on measures of language development than children from economically advantaged families, who tend to be exposed to many more words in the preschool period. Interventions aimed at increasing access to books in the home can temper these differences and improve language and pre-reading skills in the preschool child. Although experience influences the rate of language development, many linguists believe that the basic mechanism for language learn- ing is "hard-wired" in the brain. Children do not simply imitate adult speech; they abstract the complex rules of grammar from the ambient language, generating implicit hypotheses. Evidence for the existence of such implicit rules comes from analysis of grammatical errors, such as the overgeneralized use of "-s" to signify the plural and "-ed" to signify the past ("We seed lots of mouses."). Language is linked to both cognitive and emotional development. Language delays may be the first indication of an intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, or child neglect or maltreatment. Language plays a critical part in the regulation of behavior through internal- ized "private speech" in which a child repeats adult prohibitions, first audibly and then mentally. Language also allows children to express feelings, such as anger or frustration, without acting them out; conse- quently, language-delayed children may show higher rates of tantrums and other externalizing behaviors. Preschool language development lays the foundation for later suc- cess in school. Approximately 35% of U.S. children may enter school lacking the language skills that are the prerequisites for acquiring lit- eracy. Children from socially and economically disadvantaged back- grounds have an increased risk of school problems, making early detection, along with referral and enrichment in programs such as Head Start, highly crucial for later development. Although children typically learn to read and write in elementary school, critical founda- tions for literacy are established during the preschool years. Through repeated early exposure to written words, children learn about the uses of writing (telling stories or sending messages) and about its form (left to right, top to bottom). Early errors in writing, like errors in speak- ing, reveal that literacy acquisition is an active process involving the generation and revision of hypotheses. Bilingual children may initially appear to lag behind their monolingual peers in acquiring language. They learn the differing rules governing both languages, and generally have the same number of total words between the languages. Bilingual children do not follow the same course of language development as monolingual children, but rather create a different system of language cues. Several cognitive advantages have been repeatedly demonstrated among bilingual compared to monolingual children. Picture books have a special role in familiarizing young children with the printed word and in the development of verbal language. Children's vocabulary and receptive language improve when their a young child is an interactive process in which a parent repeatedly focuses the child's attention on a particular picture, asks questions, and then gives the child feedback (dialogic reading). The elements of shared attention, active participation, immediate feedback, repetition, and graduated difficulty make such routines ideal for language learn- ing. Programs in which physicians provide books to preschool children have shown improvement in language skills among the children (e.g., Reach Out and Read). The period of rapid language acquisition is also when developmental dysfluency and stuttering are most likely to emerge (see Chapter 53.1); these can be traced to activation of the cortical motor, sensory, and cerebellar areas. Common difficulties include pauses and repetitions of Chapter 25 • The Preschool Years 165 initial sounds. Stress or excitement exacerbates these difficulties, which generally resolve on their own. Although 5% of preschool children will stutter, it will resolve in 80% of those children by age 8 years. Chil- dren with stuttering should be referred for evaluation if it is severe, persistent, or associated with anxiety, or if parental concern is elicited. Treatment includes guidance to parents to reduce pressures associated with speaking. Cognition The preschool period corresponds to Piaget's preoperational (pre- logical) stage, characterized by magical thinking, egocentrism, and thinking that is dominated by perception, not abstraction (see Table 19.2). Magical thinking includes confusing coincidence with causal- ity, animism (attributing motivations to inanimate objects and events), and unrealistic beliefs about the power of wishes. A child might believe that people cause it to rain by carrying umbrellas, that the sun goes down because it is tired, or that feeling resentment toward a sibling can actually make that sibling sick. Egocentrism refers to a child's inabil- ity to take another's point of view and does not connote selfishness. A child might try to comfort an adult who is upset by bringing the adult a favorite stuffed animal. After 2 years of age, the child develops a concept of herself or himself as an individual and senses the need to feel "whole." Piaget demonstrated the dominance of perception over logic. In one experiment, water is poured back and forth between a tall, thin vase and a low, wide dish, and children are asked which container has more water. Typically, preschool-age children choose the one that looks larger (usually the tall vase), even when the examiner points out that no water has been added or taken away. Such misunderstandings reflect young children's developing hypotheses about the nature of the world, as well as their difficulty in attending simultaneously to multiple aspects of a situation. Preschool children also are able to understand causal relationships; this adds to our understanding of the ability of preschool children to engage in abstract thinking (see Chapter 19). Imitation, central to the learning experience of preschool children, is a complex act because of differences in the size of the operators (the adult and the child), different levels of dexterity, and even different out- comes. A child who watches an adult unsuccessfully attempt a simple act (unscrew a lid) will imitate the action, but often with the intended outcome and not the demonstrated (failed) outcome. Thus "imitation" goes beyond the mere repetition of observed movements. By age 3 years, children have self-identified their sex and are actively seeking understanding of the meaning of gender identification. There is a developmental progression from rigidity (males and female have strict gender roles) in the early preschool years to a more flexible real- istic understanding (males and females can have a variety of interests that are not gender specific). Parents can facilitate this flexibility by eliminating gender-based expectations and expanding play options. Play Play involves learning, physical activity, socialization with peers, and practicing adult roles. Play increases in complexity and imagination, from simple imitation of common experiences, such as shopping and putting baby to bed (2 or 3 years of age), to more extended scenarios involving singular events, such as going to the zoo or going on a trip (3 or 4 vears of age), to the creation of scenarios that have only been imagined, such as flying to the moon (4 or 5 years of age). By age 3 years, cooperative play is seen in activities such as building a tower of blocks together; later, more structured role-play activity, as in playing house, is seen. Play also becomes increasingly governed by rules, from early rules about asking (rather than taking) and sharing (2 or 3 years of age), to rules that change from moment to moment, according to the desires of the players (4 and 5 years of age), to the beginning of the recognition of rules as relatively immutable (5 years of age). Electronic forms of play (games) are best if interactive and educational and should remain limited in duration. Play also allows for resolution of conflicts and anxiety and for cre- ative outlets. Children can vent anger safely (reprimanding a doll), take on superpowers (dinosaur and superhero play), and obtain things that 

166 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior are denied in real life (an imaginary friend or stuffed animal). Cre- ativity is particularly apparent in drawing, painting, and other artistic activities. Themes and emotions that emerge in a child's drawings often reflect the emotional issues of greatest importance for the child. Difficulty distinguishing fantasy from reality colors a child's percep- tion of what the child views in the media, through programming and advertising. Twenty-five percent of young children have a television set or tablet in their bedroom; screen time in the bedroom is associ- ated with more hours of watching. The number of hours that most preschoolers watch screens exceeds guidelines (1 hr/day for 2-5 year olds). Interactive quality educational programming in which children develop social relationships with the characters can increase learning if paired with adult interaction around the storyline. Exposure to com- mercial programming with violent content is associated with behavior problems, and because children younger than 8 years are not able to comprehend the concept of persuasive intent, they are more vulnerable to advertising. Implications for Parents and Pediatricians The significance of language as a target for assessment and intervention cannot be overestimated, because of its central role as an indicator of cognitive and emotional development and a key factor in behavioral regulation and later school success. As language emerges, parents can support emotional development by using words that describe the childs feeling states ("You sound angry right now") and urging the child to use words to express rather than act out feelings. Active imaginations will come into play when children offer explanations for misbehavior. A parent's best way of dealing with untruths is to address the event, not the child, and have the child participate in "making things right." Parents should have a regular time each day for reading or looking at books with their children. Programs such as Reach Out and Read, in which clinicians give out picture books along with appropriate guid- ance during primary care visits, have been effective in increasing read- ing aloud and thereby promoting language development, particularly in lower-income families. TV and similar media should be limited to 1 hr/day of quality programming for children age 2-5 years, and parents should be watching the programs with their children and debriefing their young children afterward. At-risk children, particularly those liv- ing in poverty, can better meet future school challenges if they have early high-quality child care and learning experiences (e.g., Head Start). Preoperational thinking constrains how children understand expe- riences of illness and treatment. Children begin to understand that bodies have "insides" and "outsides." Children should be given simple, concrete explanations for medical procedures and given some control over procedures if possible. Children should be reassured that they are not to blame when receiving a vaccine or venipuncture, and parents should be discouraged from making threats about needles if their child is not cooperating with the exam. An adhesive bandage will help to make the body "whole" again in a child's mind. The active imagination that fuels play and the magical, animist thinking characteristic of preoperational cognition can also gener- ate intense fears. More than 80% of parents report at least one fear in their preschool children. Refusal to take baths or to sit on the toilet may arise from the fear of being washed or flushed away, reflecting a child's immature appreciation of relative size. Attempts to demonstrate rationally that there are no monsters in the closet often fail, inasmuch as the fear arises from preoperational thinking. However, this same thinking allows parents to be endowed with magical powers that can banish the monsters with "monster spray" or a night-light. Parents should acknowledge the tears, offer reassurance and a sense of security, and give the child some sense of control over the situation. Use of the Draw-a-Person, in which a child is asked to draw the best person the child can, may help elucidate a child's viewpoint. Emotional and Moral Development Emotional challenges facing preschool children include accepting lim- its while maintaining a sense of self-direction, reigning in aggressive and sexual impulses, and interacting with a widening circle of adults and peers. At 2 years of age, behavioral limits are predominantly external; by 5 years of age, these controls need to be internalized if a child is to function in a typical classroom. Success in achieving this goal relies on prior emotional development, particularly the ability to use internalized images of trusted adults to provide a secure environ- ment in times of stress. The love a child feels for important adults is the main incentive for the development of self-control. Children learn what behaviors are acceptable and how much power they wield vis-à-vis important adults by testing limits. Limit testing increases when it elicits attention, even though that attention is often negative, and when limits are inconsistent. Testing often arouses paren- tal anger or inappropriate solicitude as a child struggles to separate, and it gives rise to a corresponding parental challenge: letting go. Exces- sively tight limits can undermine a child's sense of initiative, whereas overly loose limits can provoke anxiety in a child who feels that no one Control is a central issue. Young children cannot control many aspects of their lives, including where they go, how long they stay, and what they take home from the store. They are also prone to lose internal control, that is, to have temper tantrums. Fear, overtiredness, hunger, inconsistent expectations, or physical discomfort can also evoke tan- trums. Tantrums normally appear toward the end of the first year of life and peak in prevalence between 2 and 4 years of age. Tantrums lasting more than 15 minutes or regularly occurring more than three times per day may reflect underlying medical, emotional, developmental, or social problems. Parents likely will not be able to reason or teach in the context of an active tantrum, and should offer emotional support dur- ing these times, sticking to short and concise explanations ("I can't let you hit"). Lessons about their behavior or discussions about strategies for future challenges should be delayed until the child is calm and able Preschool children normally experience complicated feelings toward their parents that can include strong attachment and possessiveness toward the parent of the opposite sex, jealousy and resentment of the other parent, and fear that these negative feelings might lead to abandonment. These emotions, most of which are beyond a child's ability to comprehend or verbalize, often find expression in highly labile moods. The resolution of complicated feelings (a process extending over years) involves a childs unspoken decision to identify with the parents rather than compete with them. Play and language foster the development of emotional controls by allowing children to express emotions and role-play. Curiosity about genitals and adult sexual organs is normal, as is masturbation. Excessive masturbation interfering with normal activ- ity, acting out sexual intercourse, extreme modesty, or mimicry of adult seductive behavior all suggest the possibility of sexual abuse or inappropriate exposure (see Chapter 17.1). Modesty appears gradually banen are years of ag, with wide ariation am prilure ady areas before school entry. Moral thinking is constrained by a child's cognitive level and language abilities but develops as the child builds their identity with trusted adults. Beginning before the second birthday, the child's sense of right and wrong stems from the desire to earn adult approval and avoid negative consequences. The childs impulses are tempered by external forces; the child has not yet internalized societal rules or a sense of justice and fair- ness. Over time, as the child internalizes parental admonitions, words are substituted for aggressive behaviors. Finally, the child accepts personal responsibility. Actions will be viewed by damage caused, not by intent. Empathic responses to others' distress arise during the second year of life, but the ability to consider another child's point of view remains lim- ited throughout this period. In keeping with a child's inability to focus on more than one aspect of a situation at a time, fairness is taken to mean equal treatment, regardless of circumstance. A 4 year old will acknowl- edge the importance of taking turns but will complain if he or she "didn't get enough time." Rules tend to be absolute, with guilt assigned for bad outcomes, regardless of intentions. Implications for Parents and Pediatricians The importance of the preschooler's sense of control over his or her body and surroundings have implications for practice. Preparing the 

patient by letting the child know how the visit will proceed is reassur- ing. Tell the child what will happen, but do not ask permission unless you are willing to deal with a "no" answer. A brief introduction to "pri- vate parts" is warranted before the genital examination. The visit of the 4 or 5 year old should be entertaining, because of the child's ability to communicate, as well as the child's natural curiosity. Phy- sicians should realize that all children are occasionally difficult. Guid- ance emphasizing appropriate expectations for behavioral and emotional development and acknowledging normal parental feelings of anger, guilt, and confusion should be part of all visits at this time. Parents should be queried about daily routines and their expectations of child behavior. Providing children with acceptable choices (all options being accept- able to the parent) and encouraging independence in self-care activities (feeding, dressing, and bathing) will reduce conflicts. Although some cultures condone the use of physical punishment for disciplining of young children, it is not a consistently effective means of behavioral control (Chapter 20). As children habituate to repeated spanking, parents have to spank ever harder to achieve the desired response, increasing the risk of serious injury. Sufhciently harsh pun- ishment may acutely inhibit undesired behaviors, but at great long- term psychologic cost. Children may mimic the physical punishment that they receive; children who are spanked will have more aggressive behaviors later. Whereas spanking is the use of force, externally applied, to produce behavior change, discipline is the process that allows the child to internalize controls on behavior. Alternative discipline strate- gies should be offered, such as the "countdown" for transitions along with consistent limit setting, "time-outs" and "time-ins" (fun activities with caregiver present and interacting), clear communication of rules, and frequent approval with positive reinforcement of productive play and behavior (see Chapter 20 and Tables 20.3 and 20.4). Punishment should be immediate, specific to the behavior, and time limited. Time- out for approximately 1 minute per year of age is very effective if children are getting sufficient time in. A kitchen timer or digital phone alarm allows the parent to step back from the situation; the child is free when the timer rings. Although one strategy might not work for all children uniformly, consistency is integral to healthy learning and growth. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 26 Middle Childhood Mutiat T. Onigbanjo and Susan Feigelman Middle childhood (6-11 years of age) is the period in which children increasingly separate from parents and seek acceptance from teachers, other adults, and peers. Children begin to feel under pressure to con- form to the style and ideals of the peer group. Self-esteem becomes a central issue, as children develop the cognitive ability to consider their own self-evaluations and their perception of how others see them. For the first time, they are judged according to their ability to produce socially valued outputs, such as getting good grades, playing a musical instrument, or hitting home runs. PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT Growth occurs discontinuously, in three to six irregularly timed spurts each year, but varies both within and among individuals. Growth during the period averages 3-3.5 kg (6.6-7.7 lb) and 6-7 cm (2.4-2.8 in) per year (Fig. 26.1). The head grows only 2 cm in circumference throughout the entire period, reflecting a slowing of brain growth. Myelination contin- ues into adolescence, with peak gray matter at 12-14 years. Body habitus is more erect than previously, with long legs compared with the torso. Chapter 26 • Middle Childhood 167 Growth of the midface and lower face occurs gradually. Loss of decid- uous (baby) teeth is a more dramatic sign of maturation, beginning around 6 years of age. Replacement with adult teeth occurs at a rate of about four per year, so that by age 9 years, children will have eight per- manent incisors and four permanent molars. Premolars erupt by 11-12 years of age (see Chapter 353). Lymphoid tissues hypertrophy and reach maximal size, often giving rise to impressive tonsils and adenoids. Muscular strength, coordination, and stamina increase progressively, as does the ability to perform complex movements, such as dancing or shooting baskets. Such higher-order motor skills are the result of both maturation and training; the degree of accomplishment reflects wide variability in innate skill, interest, and opportunity. Physical fitness has declined among school-age children. Sedentary habits at this age are associated with increased lifetime risk of obesity, cardiovascular disease, lower academic achievement, and lower self- esteem. The number of overweight children and the degree of over- weight have been increasing (see Chapter 65). Only 15% of middle and junior high schools require physical education classes at least three days per week. One quarter of youth do not engage in any free-time physical activity, despite the recommendation for at least 1 hour of physical activity per day. Perceptions of body image develop early during this period; chil- dren as young as 5 and 6 years may express dissatisfaction with their body image; by ages 8 and 9 years many of these youth report trying to diet, often using ill-advised regimens. Loss-of-control (binge) eating occurs among approximately 6% of children at this age. Before puberty the sensitivity of the hypothalamus and pituitary changes, leading to increased gonadotropin synthesis. Interest in gender differences and sexual behavior increases progressively until puberty. Although this is a period when sexual drives are limited, mas- turbation is common, and children may be interested in differences between genders. Rates of maturation differ by geography, ethnicity, and country. Sexual maturity occurs earlier for both sexes in the United States. Differences in maturation rates have implications for differing expectations of others based on sexual maturation. Implications for Parents and Pediatricians Middle childhood is generally a time of excellent health. However, children have variable sizes, shapes, and abilities. Children of this age compare taed abilities Fears el being ang ormal can lead to availaced can lead to avoidance of situations in which physical differences might be revealed, such as gym class or medical examinations. However, all children, including those with disabilities, should participate in gym classes. Those with physical disabilities may face special stresses; medical, social, and psy- chologic risks tend to occur together. Children should be asked about risk factors for obesity. Participa- tion in physical activity, including organized sports or other organized activities, can foster skill, teamwork, and fitness as well as a sense of accomplishment, but pressure to compete when the activity is no lon- ger enjoyable has negative effects. Counseling on establishing healthy eating habits and limited screen time should be given to all families. Prepubertal children should not engage in high-stress, high-impact sports, such as power lifting or tackle football, because skeletal imma- turity increases the risk of injury and concussions may have long-term sequelae (see Chapter 729). COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT The thinking of early elementary school-age children differs qualita- tively from that of preschool children. In place of the magical, ego- perception-bound cognition of preschool school-age children increasingly apply rules based on observable phe- nomena, factor in multiple dimensions and points of view, and inter- pret their perceptions using physical laws. Piaget documented this shift from preoperational to concrete (logical) operations (see Chapter 19). When 5 year olds watch a ball of clay being rolled into a snake, they might insist that the snake has "more" because it is longer. In contrast, 7 year olds typically reply that the ball and the snake must weigh the same because nothing has been added or taken away or because the 

168 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior 2 to 20 years: Boys Stature-for-age and Weight-for-age percentiles NAME RECORD # 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Mother's Stature Age Weight Father's Stature Stature BMI* cm LL AGE (YEARS) *To Calculate BMI: Weight (kg) ÷ Stature (cm) ÷ Stature (cm) x 10,000 or Weight (Ib) ÷ Stature (in) ÷ Stature (in) × 703 in cm= =3=4=5=6=7=8=9=10=11= =160= - 62- S =1557 -60= T E1503 -95=190÷ -90-185- =75=180= =50-=175= -25= €1703 = 10= • 5=165= =160= =155= =150= -58 U R E -56 =145= E1403 -54 -52 =135= E130= •50 =125₴ -48 E120 -46 E115- -44 E1107 -42- E105= 40- E100÷ -38 :95 -36 90= -34 -853 =105=230- =100=220- -954 :95÷210- :90÷200- =90= 85=190- 80=180- =75- 170- -75- E160- =50=70=150- =255 :65=140- 10= :60=130- 5= 55=120- :50=110- W -32 -30- -80₴ -70 -60- 80} -35] =30= G H -50- -40 -30 =253 -20- 45÷1001 40= 90- 35₴80- 30₽ -70- -60- =25₴ - 50- 20₽ -40- 15₴ 30- 10₴ -kg #Ib S A U R W E G H T - 15# 10- Ib = kg= 2345678 9 AGE (YEARS): 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Published May 30, 2000 (modified 11/21/00). SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000). http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts SAFER • HEALTHIER• PEOPLE™ Fig. 26.1 A, Stature (height) for age and weight for boys, age 2-20 years. B, Stature (height) for age and weight for girls, age 2-20 years. (Courtesy National Center for Health Statistics, in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2000. http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts.) 

2 to 20 years: Girls Stature-for-age and Weight-for-age percentiles Chapter 26 • Middle Childhood 169 NAME - RECORD # 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 AGE (YEARS) S TI R E W G H Mother's Stature Date Father's Stature Age Weight Stature BMI* cm=_ in -76- =190= -74 €185= 72- ÷1803 -70- *To Calculate BMI: Weight (kg) ÷ Stature (cm) ÷ Stature (cm) x 10,000 or Weight (Ib) ÷ Stature (in) ÷ Stature (in) x 703 in cm # =3=4= 5=6=7=8= = 9 =10÷113 [160: 62- 60 155- €150= 58- €145 =95=175= = 90= -68- -170- =75= -66- =50=165= -64- -25€1607 -62- - 10=155= 5= -60- =150÷ -56- 140- =135= E130= £125= £1207 15 =105=230- =100=220- =95$210- -95 -110- 90- E1053 E100÷ <753 =953 -90 =85: -25- =10= 5- =80: -803 =353 -70 -60 -50 -40= -30 30} =253 -207 : 15= Ib : 10- •kg= 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 Published May 30, 2000 (modified 11/21/00). SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000). http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts EAGE (YEARS 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 -10= kg = Ib SAFER • HEALTHIER• PEOPLE Fig. 26.1, cont'd U R E W E HI T 

170 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 26.1 Selected Perceptual, Cognitive, and Language Processes Required for Elementary School Success PROCESS PERCEPTUAL Visual analysis Proprioception and motor control Phonologic processing COGNITIVE Long-term memory, both storage and recall Selective attention Sequencing LANGUAGE Receptive language Expressive language DESCRIPTION ASSOCIATED PROBLEMS Ability to break a complex figure into components and understand their spatial relationships Persistent letter confusion (e.g., between b, d, and g); difficulty with basic reading and writing and limited "sight" vocabulary Aid to onsiously pration complexposen feel Poly tight pencil grip, precial difficulty wot timen overly tight pencil grasp; special difficulty with timed Ability to perceive differences between similar-sounding Delayed receptive language and reading skill; words and to break down words into constituent attention and behavior problems secondary to not sounds understanding directions; delayed acquisition of letter-sound correlations (phonetics) Ability to acquire skills that are "automatic" (i.e., accessible without conscious thought) Ability to attend to important stimuli and ignore distractions Ability to remember things in order; facility with time concepts Delayed mastery of the alphabet (reading and writing letters); slow handwriting; inability to progress beyond basic mathematics Difficulty following multistep instructions, completing assignments, and behaving well; problems with peer interaction Difficulty organizing assignments, planning, spelling, and telling time Ability to comprehend complex constructions, function words (e.g., if, when, only, except), nuances of speech, and extended blocks of language (e.g., paragraphs) Ability to recall required words effortlessly (word finding), control meanings by varying position and word endings, and construct meaningful paragraphs and stories Difficulty following directions; wandering attention during lessons and stories; problems with reading comprehension; problems with peer relationships Difficulty expressing feelings and using words for self- defense, with resulting frustration and physical acting out; struggling during "circle time" and in language- based subjects (e.g., English) snake is both longer and thinner. This cognitive reorganization occurs at different rates in different contexts. In the context of social inter- actions with siblings, young children often demonstrate an ability to understand alternate points of view long before they demonstrate that ability in their thinking about the physical world. Understanding time and space constructs occurs in the later part of this period. The concept of school readiness has evolved. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends following an "interactional relational" model in which the focus is on the child, the environment, and the resulting interac- tions. This model explicitly asserts that all children can learn and that the educational process is reciprocal between the child and the school. It is developmentally based, recognizing the importance of early experiences for later development. Rather than delaying school entry, high-quality early-education programs may be the key to ultimate school success. School makes increasing cognitive demands on the child. Mastery of the elementary curriculum requires that many perceptual, cogni- tive, and language processes work efficiently (Table 26.1), and children are expected to attend to many inputs at once. The first 2-3 years of elementary school are devoted to acquiring the fundamentals: reading, writing, and basic mathematics skills. By third grade, children need to be able to sustain attention through a 45-minute period, and the cur- riculum requires more complex tasks. The goal of reading a paragraph is no longer to decode the words, but to understand the content; the goal of writing is no longer spelling or penmanship, but composition. The volume of work increases along with the complexity. Cognitive abilities interact with a wide array of attitudinal and emo- tional factors in determining classroom performance. These factors include external rewards (eagerness to please adults and approval from peers) and internal rewards (competitiveness, willingness to work for a delayed reward, belief in one's abilities, and ability to risk trying when success is not ensured). Success predisposes to success, whereas fail- ure impacts self-esteem and reduces self-efficacy, diminishing a child's willingness to take future risks. wordplay (puns and insults) that exercise their growing cognitive and lin- guistic mastery. Many become experts on subjects of their own choosing. such as sports trivia, or develop hobbies, such as special card collections. Others become avid readers or take on artistic pursuits. Whereas board and card games were once the usual leisure-time activity of youth, video, computer, and other electronic games currently fill this need. Implications for Parents and Pediatricians Pediatricians have an important role in preparing their patients for school entrance by promoting health through immunizations, adequate nutrition, appropriate recreation, and screening for physical, develop- mental, and cognitive disorders. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that pediatric providers promote the "5 Rs" of early edu- cation: (1) reading as a daily family activity; (2) rhyming, playing, and cuddling together; (3) routines and regular times for meals, play, and sleep; (4) reward through praise for successes; and (5) reciprocal nur- turing relationships. Concrete operations allow children to understand simple explana- tions for illnesses and necessary treatments, although they may revert to prelogical thinking when under stress. A child with pneumonia may be able to explain about white cells fighting the "germs" in the lungs but may still secretly harbor the belief that the sickness is a punishment for disobedience. As children are faced with more abstract concepts, academic and classroom behavior problems emerge and come to the pediatrician's attention. Referrals may be made to the school for remediation or to community resources (medical or psychologic) when appropriate. The causes may be one or more of the following: deficits in percep- tion (vision and hearing); specific learning disabilities (see Chapters 51 and 52); global cognitive delay (intellectual disability; Chapter 56); deficits in attention and executive function (Chapters 49 and 50); 

and attention deficits secondary to family dysfunction, depression, anxiety, or chronic illness. Children whose learning style does not fit the classroom culture may have academic difficulties and need assess- ment before failure sets in. Simply having a child repeat a failed rarely has any beneficial effect and often seriously undercuts the child's self-esteem. In addition to finding the problem areas, identifying each child's strengths is important. Educational approaches that value a wide range of talents ("multiple intelligences") beyond the traditional read- ing, writing, and mathematics may allow more children to succeed. The change in cognition allows the child to understand "if/when" responsibilities and expectations accompany increased rights and privileges. Discipline strategies should move toward negotiation and a clear understanding of consequences, includ- ing removal of privileges for infringements. SOCIAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MORAL DEVELOPMENT Social and Emotional Development In middle childhood, energy is directed toward creativity and pro- ductivity. Changes occur in three spheres: the home, the school, and the neighborhood. Of these, the home and family remain the most influential. Increasing independence is marked by the first sleepover at a friend's house and the first time at overnight camp. Parents should make demands for effort in school and extracurricular activities, cel- ebrate successes, and offer unconditional acceptance when failures occur. Regular chores, associated with an allowance, provide an oppor- tunity for children to contribute to family functioning and learn the value of money. These responsibilities may be a testing ground for psy- chologic separation, leading to conflict. Siblings have critical roles as competitors, loyal supporters, and role models. The beginning of school coincides with a child's further separation trom the family and the increasing importance of teacher and peer rela- tionships. Social groups tend to be same-sex, with frequent changing of membership, contributing to a child's growing social development and competence. Popularity, a central ingredient of self-esteem, may be won through possessions (having the latest electronic gadgets or the right clothes), as well as through personal attractiveness, accomplish- ments, and actual social skills. Children are aware of racial differences and are beginning to form opinions about racial groups that impact their relationships. Gender identification, which began in early child- hood, continues to evolve and can have significant implications for peer relationships and self-awareness. Some children conform readily to the peer norms and enjoy easy social success. Those who adopt individualistic styles or have visible differences may be teased or bullied. Children with deficits in social skills may go to extreme lengths to win acceptance, only to meet with repeated failure. Attributions conferred by peers, such as funny, stu- pid, bad, or fat, may become incorporated into a child's self-image and affect the child's personality, as well as school performance. Parents may have their greatest effect indirectly, through actions that change the peer group (changing the child's school or encouraging involve- ment in structured after-school activities). Children who identity with a gender different from their sex of birth, or whose manner and dress reflect those more typically seen as "opposite" their birth sex, may be subject to teasing or bullying (Chapter 153). This can magnify the con- fusion for these children, who are formulating their own concept of In the neighborhood, real dangers, such as busy streets, bullies, violence, and strangers, tax school-age children's common sense and resourcefulness (see Chapter 15). Interactions with peers without close adult supervision call on increasing conflict resolution skills. Media exposure to adult materialism, sexuality, substance use, and violence may be frightening, reinforcing children's feeling of powerlessness in the larger world. Compensatory fantasies of being powerful may fuel the fascination with heroes and superheroes. A balance between fan- tasy and an appropriate ability to negotiate real-world challenges indi- cates healthy emotional development. Chapter 26 • Middle Childhood 171 Moral Development Although by age 6 years most children will have a conscience (inter- nalized rules of society), they vary greatly in their level of moral devel- opment. For younger children, many still subscribe to the notion that rules are established and enforced by an authority figure (parent or teacher), and decision-making is guided by self-interest (avoidance of negative and receipt of positive consequences). The needs of others are not strongly considered in decision-making. As they grow older, most will recognize not only their own needs and desires but also those of others, although personal consequences are still the primary driver of behavior. Social behaviors that are socially undesirable are considered wrong. By age 10-11 years, the combination of peer pres- sure, a desire to please authority figures, and an understanding of reciprocity (treat others as you wish to be treated) shapes the child's Implications for Parents and Pediatricians Children need unconditional support as well as realistic demands as they venture into a world that is often frightening. A daily query from parents over the dinner table or at bedtime about the good and bad things that happened during the child's day may uncover prob- lems early. Parents may have difficulty allowing the child indepen- dence or may exert excessive pressure on their children to achieve academic or competitive success. Children who struggle to meet such expectations may have behavior problems or psychosomatic Many children face stressors that exceed the normal challenges of separation and success in school and the neighborhood. Approxi- mately 50% of all marriages in the United States end in divorce. In addition, domestic violence, parental substance abuse, and other adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) may also impair a child's ability to use home as a secure base for refueling emotional ener- gies. In many neighborhoods, random violence makes the normal development of independence extremely dangerous. Older children may join gangs as a means of self-protection and a way to attain recognition and to belong to a cohesive group. Children who bully others and those who are victims of bullying should be evaluated, because bullying is associated with mood disorders, family prob- lems, and school adjustment problems. Parents should reduce expo- sure to hazards where possible. Because of the risk of unintentional firearm injuries to children, parents should be encouraged to ask parents of playmates whether a gun is kept in their home and, if so, Pediatrician visits are infrequent in this period; therefore each visit is an opportunity to assess children's functioning in all con- texts (home, school, neighborhood). Maladaptive behaviors, both internalizing and externalizing, occur when children do not have safe, secure attachments to adults and stress in any of these environ- ments overwhelms the child's coping responses, becoming "toxic stress." Because of continuous exposure and the strong influence of media (programming and advertisements) on children's beliefs and attitudes, parents must be alert to exposures from television and internet. Youth 8-12 years of age spend over 6 hr/day with a vari- ety of media; half have a TV in their bedroom. Parents should be advised to remove the TV from their children's rooms, limit view- ing to 2 hr/day, and monitor what programs children watch. Nearly all children have exposure to mobile technology. Some computer screen time may be necessary for schoolwork and virtual learning. However, the widespread use of social media may have detrimen- tal effects including risky health behaviors, cyberbullying, targeted advertisements, and low self-esteem. The Draw-a-Person (for ages 3-10 years, with instructions to "draw a complete person") and Kinetic Family Drawing (beginning at age 5 years, with instruc- tions to "draw a picture of everyone in your family doing some- thing") are useful office tools to assess a child's functioning. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

172 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Chapter 27 Assessment of Growth Vaneeta Bamba and Andrea Kelly Growth can be considered a vital sign in children, and aberrant growth may be the first sign of an underlying pathologic condition. The most powerful tool in growth assessment is the growth chart (Figs. 24.1, 24.2, 26.1, and 27.1), used in combination with accurate measurements of height, weight, head circumference, and calculation of the body mass index (BMI). TECHNIQUES TO MEASURE GROWTH Growth assessment requires accurate and precise measurements. For infants and toddlers age <2 years, weight, length, and head circum- ference are obtained. Head circumference is measured with a flexible tape measure starting at the supraorbital ridge around to the occipital prominence in the back of the head, locating the maximal circum- ference. Height and weight measures should be performed with the infant naked, and ideally, repeated measures will be performed on the same equipment. Recumbent length is most accurately measured by two examiners (one to position the child). Hair ornaments and hair- styles that interfere with measurements and positioning should be removed. The child's head is positioned against an inflexible measuring board in the Frankfurt plane, in which the outer canthi of the eyes are in line with the external auditory meatus and are perpendicular to the long axis of the trunk. Legs should be fully extended, and feet are maintained perpendicular to the plane of the supine infant. For older children (>2 years) who can stand unassisted, standing heights should be obtained without shoes, using a stadiometer with the head in the Frankfurt plane, and the back of the head, thoracic spine, but- tocks, and heels approximating the vertical axis of one another and the Measurements obtained using alternative means, such as marking examination paper at the foot and head of a supine infant or using a tape measure or wall growth chart with a book or ruler on the head can lead to inaccuracy and render the measurement useless. Measurements for height and weight should be plotted on the age- appropriate growth curve. Comparing measurements with previous growth trends, repeating measures that are inconsistent, and plotting results longitudinally are essential for monitoring growth. Calculation of interim linear height velocity, such as centimeters per year (cm/yr), allows more precise comparison of growth rate to the norm (Table 27.1). If a child is growing faster or more slowly than expected, measure- ment of body proportions, which follow a predictable sequence of changes with development, are useful. The head and trunk are relatively large at birth, with progressive lengthening of the limbs throughout development, particularly during puberty. The upper-to-lower body segment ratio (U/L ratio) provides an assessment of truncal growth relative to limb growth. The lower-body segment is defined as the length from the top of the symphysis pubis to the floor, and the upper- body segment is the total height minus the lower-body segment. The U/L ratio equals approximately 1.7 at birth, 1.3 at 3 years, and 1.0 after 7 years. Higher U/L ratios are characteristic of short-limb dwarfism, as occurs with Turner syndrome or bone disorders, whereas lower ratios suggest hypogonadism or Marfan syndrome. Arm span also provides assessment of proportionality and is mea- sured as the distance between the tips of the middle fingers while the patient stands with the back against the wall with arms outstretched horizontally at a 90-degree angle to the trunk. This span should be close to height, although the proportion changes with age. GROWTH CURVES The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend use of the 2006 World Health Organization (WHO) growth curves for children age 0-24 months and the 2000 CDC growth curves for children age 2-19 years (https://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts). There are five stan- dard gender-specific charts: (1) weight for age, (2) height (length and stature) for age, (3) head circumference for age, (4) weight for height (length and stature) for infants, and (5) BMI for age (see Fig. 27.1; see also Figs. 24.1, 24.2, and 26.1). Clinicians should confirm that the correct CDC and WHO growth charts are used in electronic medical records to ensure accurate characterization of growth. The WHO curves describe growth differently than the CDC curves (Fig. 27.2). The WHO curves are growth standards that describe how children grow under optimal conditions, whereas the CDC curves are growth references that describe how children grew in a specific time and place. The WHO growth curves are based on longitudinal growth studies in which cohorts of newborns were chosen from six countries (Brazil, Ghana, India, Norway, Oman, United States) using specific inclusion and exclusion criteria; all infants were breastfed for at least 12 months and were predominantly breastfed for the first 4 months of life. They were measured regularly from birth to 23 months during 1997-2003. In contrast, the CDC curves are based on cross-sectional data from different studies during different time points. Growth curves for children age 2-59 months were based on the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), which included a cross sec- tion of the U.S. population. These data were supplemented with addi- tional participants in a separate nutrition surveillance study. Several deficiencies of the older charts have been corrected, such as the overrepresentation of bottle-fed infants and the reliance on a local dataset for the infant charts. The disjunction between length and height when transitioning from the infant curves to those for older children Each chart is composed of percentile curves, which indicate the percentage of children at a given age on the x axis whose measured value falls below the corresponding value on the y axis. The 2006 WHO growth curves include values that are 2 standard deviations (SD) above and below median (2nd and 98th percentiles), whereas the 2000 CDC growth curves include 3rd and 97th percentiles. On the WHO weight chart for boys ages 0-24 months (see Fig. 24.2A), the 9 month age line intersects the 25th percentile curve at 8.3 kg, indicating that 25% of 9-month-old males in the WHO cohorts weigh less than 8.3 kg (75% weigh more). Similarly, a 9-month-old male weighing more than 11 kg is heavier than 98% of his peers. The median or 50th percentile is also termed the standard value, in the sense that the standard length for a 7-month-old female is 67.3 cm (see Fig. 24.2B). The weight-for-length charts (see Fig. 24.1) are constructed in an analogous fashion, with length or stature in place of age on the x axis; the median or standard weight for a female measuring 100 cm is 15 kg. Extremes of height or weight can also be expressed in terms of the age for which they would represent the standard or median. For instance, an 18-month-old female who is 74.9 cm (2nd percentile) is at the 50th percentile for a 13 month old. Thus the height age is 13 months. Weight age can similarly be expressed. In assessing adolescents, caution must be used in applying cross- sectional charts. Growth during adolescence is linked temporally to the onset of puberty, which varies widely. Normal variations in the tim- ing of the growth spurt can lead to misdiagnosis of growth abnormali- ties. By using cross-sectional data based on chronologic age, the charts combine youth who are at different stages of maturation. Data for 12-year-old males include both earlier-maturing males who are at the peak of their growth spurts and later-maturing ones who are still grow- ing at their prepubertal rate. The net results are an artificially blunted growth peak, and the appearance that adolescents grow more gradually and for a longer duration than in actuality. When additional insight is necessary, growth charts derived from longitudinal data, such as the height velocity charts of Tanner and colleagues, are recommended. The longitudinal component of these velocity curves is based on British children from the 1950s and 1960s, and cross-sectional data from U.S. children were superimposed. Height velocity curves based on longitudinal data from a multiethnic study conducted at five U.S. sites included SD scores for height velocity for 

Chapter 27 • Assessment of Growth 173 NAME - 2 to 20 years: Boys Body mass index-for-age percentiles Date Age Weight Stature BMI* Comments RECORD # *To Calculate BMI: Weight (kg) ÷ Stature (cm) ÷ Stature (cm) x 10,000 or Weight (Ib) ÷ Stature (in) ÷ Stature (in) × 703 - BMI - - 27 - 26 - 25 - 24 - 23 22 - 21 - 20 - 19 - 18. 17 - 16- - 15- - 14- — 13 - — 12- kg/m' ] AGE (YEARS): 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 A Published May 30, 2000 (modified 10/16/00). SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000). http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts Fig. 27.1 A, Body mass index (BMI) percentiles for boys, age 2-20 years. 95. 901 851 751 501 251 10 - 5' - BMI - 35 - 34 33 32 31 - - 30 29 28 27 - 26 25 24 23 22 21 - 20 - - 19. - 18 17 - - 16. 15 14- 13 - 12- kg/m' 16 17 18 19 20 ADC SAFER • HEALTHIER • PEOPLE" 

174 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior 2 to 20 years: Girls Body mass index-for-age percentiles Date Age Weight Stature BMI* Comments NAME RECORD # - BMI- 95 *To Calculate BMI: Weight (kg) ÷ Stature (cm) ÷ Stature (cm) x 10,000 or Weight (Ib) ÷ Stature (in) ÷ Stature (in) × 703 - BMI 901 - 27 - 26 ÷851 - 25 - 24 —754 - 23 22 1501 - 21 - 20 - 19 - 18 - 10г = 5' 17 16 - 15 14 • 13 12 kg/m'] AGE (YEARS) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 - 35- - 34- 33- 32- 31- - 30- 29 28 27 - - 26 25 - 24 23 - - 22 - 21 - 20 - - 19 — - 18 17 - - 16 — - 15- - 14 — - 13 — - 12— kg/m 19 20 Published May 30, 2000 (modified 10/16/00). SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with IDe B the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000). http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts SAFER • HEALTHIER • PEOPLE™ Fig. 27.1 Cont'd B, BMI percentiles for girls, age 2-20 years. Official Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] growth charts, as de- scribed in this chapter.) The 85th to 95th percentile is at risk for overweight; > 95th percentile is overweight; <5th percentile is underweight. Technical information and interpretation and management guides are available at www.cdc.gov/nchs. Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2000 (http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts). 

Chapter 27 • Assessment of Growth 175 16- 14- 12 10- 8 6 4- 2 High weight for lengtht •CDC - WHO Low weight for age* Low length for age* 0-5 6-11 12-17 18-23 0-5 6-11 12-17 18-23 0-5 6-11 12-17 18-23 Age (mo) Fig. 27.2 Comparison of World Health Organization (WHO) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) growth chart prevalence of low length for age, low weight for age, and high weight for length among children age <24 months, United States, 1999-2004. *, ≤5th percentile on the CDC charts; ≤2.3rd percentile on the WHO charts. t, ≥95th percentile on the CDC charts; ≥97.7th percentile on the WHO charts. (Data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999-2004; from Grummer-Strawn LM, Reinold C, Krebs NF: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Use of World Health Organization and CDC growth charts for children ages 0-59 months in the United States, MMWR Recomm Rep 2010;59(RR-9):1-15.) Table 27.1 Growth Velocity and Other Growth Characteristics by Age INFANCY CHILDHOOD Birth-12 mo: 24 cm/yr 12-24 mo: 10 cm/yr 24-36 mo: 8 cm/yr 6 cm/yr Slowly decelerates before pubertal onset Height typically does not cross percentile lines ADOLESCENCE Sigmoid-shaped growth Adolescent growth spurt accounts for about 15% of adult height Peak height velocity Girls: 8 cm/yr Boys: 10 cm/yr earlier- and later-maturing adolescents to facilitate the identification of poor or accelerated linear growth. Specialized growth charts have been developed for U.S. children with various conditions, including very low birthweight (VLBW), small for gestational age, trisomy 21, Turner syndrome, and achondro- plasia, and should be used when appropriate. Facilitating identification of obesity, the charts include curves for plotting BMI for ages 2-20 years rather than weight for height (see Fig. 27.1). Methodologic steps have ensured that the increase in the preva- lence of obesity has not unduly raised the upper limits of normal. BMI can be calculated as weight in kilograms/ (height in meters)? or weight in pounds/ (height in inches) × 703, with fractions of pounds and inches expressed as decimals. Because of variable weight and height gains during childhood, BMI must be interpreted relative to age and sex; the BMI percentile provides a more standardized comparison. For example, a 6-year-old girl with a BMI of 19.7 kg/m? (97th percentile) is obese, whereas a 15-year-old female with BMI of 19.7 kg/m~ (50th percentile) is normal weight. Normal Growth growth. The average difference in stature between males and females is 5 inches (13 cm); therefore 5 inches (13 cm) is subtracted from the father's height before averaging with mother's height in a female, whereas 5 inches (13 cm) is added to the mother's height before averag ing with the father's height in a male: • Males: [(Maternal height + 5 inches) + Paternal height]/2 • Females: [Maternal height + (Paternal height - 5 inches)]/2 Furthermore, generally 4 inches (2 SD) is applied above and below this value to provide a genetic target height range. For example, if the mother is 63 inches tall and the father 70 inches tall, the daughter's sex-adjusted midparental height is 64 inches $ 4 inches, for a target height range of 60-68 inches. The son of these same parents would have a sex-adjusted midparental height of 69 inches, with a range of 65-73 inches. Note that these general guidelines do not address extreme differences between parental heights that may affect indi- vidual target height range. Growth can be divided into four major phases: fetal, infantile, childhood, and adolescence. Growth rate varies by age (see Table 27.1). Different factors are of different importance in each phase, and the various contributors to poor growth may feature more in one phase than another. Long-term height may be permanently compro- mised if one entire phase is characterized by poor growth. Therefore early detection and prevention are critical. Fetal growth is the fast- est growth phase, with maternal, placental, fetal, and environmental factors playing key roles. Birthweight does not necessarily correlate with adult height, although factors that inhibit fetal growth may have long-lasting effects, as seen in children with intrauterine growth retardation. Infantile growth is particularly sensitive to nutrition as well as congenital conditions. Genetic height gradually becomes influential; indeed, crossing of percentiles in the first 2 years of life is common as children begin to approach their genetic potential. Childhood growth is often the most steady and predictable. Dur- ing this phase the height percentile is fairly consistent in otherwise healthy children. Adolescent growth is associated with a decrease in growth veloc- ity before the onset of puberty; this deceleration tends to be more pronounced in males. During pubertal development, sex hormones 

176 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior +20 mean -2 ₫ Height Postnatal onset pathologic short stature Constitutional growth delay Familial short stature • Prenatal onset pathologic short stature 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Infants (mo) Children (yr) Fig. 27.3 Height-for-age growth curves of the four general causes of proportional short stature: postnatal onset pathologic short stature, consti- tutional growth delay, familial short stature, and prenatal onset short stature. (From Mahoney CP: Evaluating the child with short stature, Pediatr Clin North Am 1987;34:825.) (testosterone and estrogen) are the primary drivers of growth and enhance growth hormone secretion, thereby facilitating pubertal growth acceleration. Females typically experience growth acceleration during Tanner stage 3 for breast development, whereas this accelera- tion occurs during Tanner stage 4 for pubic hair development in males. Males not only achieve greater height velocities than females during puberty, but also grow approximately 2 years longer than females, both of which contribute to the taller average height of adult males com- pared with adult females. Abnormal Growth Growth is a dynamic process. A child measured at the 5th percentile for stature may be growing normally, may be failing to grow, or may be recovering from growth failure, depending on the trajectory of the growth curve (Fig. 27.3). Growth failure must be distinguished from short stature. Growth failure is defined as achievement of height veloc- ity that is less than expected for a child's age and sex (and pubertal development if relevant) or a downward crossing of more than 2 per- centile lines for height on the growth chart. Short stature is defined as growing either below expected genetic potential or growing below -2 SD for age and sex. For some children, however, growth param- eters ≤2 SD may be normal, and differentiating appropriately small vs. pathologically small is crucial. Midparental height, ethnicity, and other factors that may be inherent in the child's genetic height poten- tial are important considerations in the assessment of growth. For children with particularly tall or short parents, overdiagnosing and underdiagnosing growth disorders are risks if parental heights are not considered. In the setting of familial short stature or tall stature, more specialized charts can help determine whether a child is even shorter or taller than expected for parental heights, to prevent misdiagnosis of For premature infants, overdiagnosis of growth failure can be avoided by using growth charts developed specifically for this popu- lation. A cruder method, subtracting the weeks of prematurity from the postnatal age when plotting growth parameters, does not capture the variability in growth velocity that VLBW infants demonstrate. Although VLBW infants may continue to show catch-up growth through early school age, most achieve weight catch-up during the second year and height catch-up by 3-4 years, barring medical compli- cations (see Chapter 119). Abnormal growth may be caused by a variety of factors, including congenital conditions, systemic disease, endocrine disorders, nutri- tional deficiency (see Chapter 62), psychosocial conditions, constitu- tional delay, or familial disorders (Tables 27.2 and 27.3). In congenital pathologic short stature, an infant may or may not be born small, but growth gradually tapers throughout infancy (see Fig. 27.3). Causes include chromosome or genetic abnormalities (Turner syndrome, skeletal dysplasia, trisomy 21; see Chapters 57 and 99), perinatal infec- tion, extreme prematurity, and teratogens (phenytoin, alcohol) (see Chapters 117.4 and 146). Linear growth deceleration with or without changes in weight can occur at the onset or as a result of a systemic illness or chronic inflammation. Medications such as high-dose glu- cocorticoids may also impact growth. Analysis of growth patterns requires consideration of weight status. Poor linear growth in the set- ting of decreasing BMI suggests a nutritional or gastrointestinal issue, whereas poor linear growth in the context of good or robust BMI may suggest a hormonal condition (hypothyroidism, growth hormone defi- ciency, cortisol excess). Not all decreased growth is abnormal; variations of growth include constitutional growth (and pubertal) delay and familial short stature. In constitutional growth delay, weight and height decrease near the end of infancy, parallel the norm through middle childhood, and accelerate toward the end of adolescence with achievement of normal adult height. In familial short stature, both the infant/child and the parent(s) are small; growth runs parallel to and just below the normal curves. Although tall or accelerated growth may be a variation of normal, unexpected increase in growth may also signal an underlying condi- tion (see Table 27.3). Typically, obese individuals grow more quickly than their peers because of peripheral aromatization of estrogen and effects on bone maturation. Despite early taller stature, obese children are not ultimately taller than anticipated for genetic height. Early onset of puberty, growth hormone excess, and sex steroid exposure can also lead to accelerated growth. Several of these conditions may ultimately lead to short stature in adulthood. Genetic conditions associated with tall stature and overgrowth include Sotos, Klinefelter, and Marfan syn- dromes (see Chapter 598 and 598.1). 

Table 27.2 Common Causes of Decreased Growth and Short Stature Variation of normal Familial short stature Constitutional delay Delayed puberty Nutrition and gastrointestinal conditions Malnutrition Celiac disease Inflammatory bowel disease Genetic conditions Turner syndrome Prader-Willi syndrome 22q deletion syndrome Trisomy 21 Skeletal dysplasias: achondroplasia, SHOX haploinsufficiency, osteogenesis imperfecta Endocrine conditions Hypothyroidism Growth hormone deficiency Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus Poorly controlled diabetes insipidus Metabolic bone disease: rickets, hypophosphatasia Glucocorticoid excess Psychosocial causes Renal conditions Renal tubular acidosis Nephrotic syndrome Medications Glucocorticoids Inappropriate sex steroid exposure Antiepileptic medications Table 27.3 Common Causes of Increased Growth and Tall Stature Variation of normal Constitutional tall stature Familial tall stature Endocrine conditions Growth hormone excess Precocious puberty (ultimate height may be decreased) Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Obesity Genetic conditions Marfan syndrome Klinefelter syndrome Sotos syndrome Evaluation of Abnormal Growth Evaluation of abnormal growth should include confirmation that the data are accurate and plotted correctly. Comparisons should be made with previous measurements. If poor or rapid growth or short or tall stature is a concern, a radiograph of the left hand and wrist to show the bone age can provide information about skeletal maturation. Skeletal development represents physiologic rather than chronologic age. Ref- erence standards for bone maturation facilitate estimation of bone age (see Table 23.3). A delayed bone age (skeletal age younger than chrono- logic age) suggests catch-up potential for linear growth. Advanced bone age suggests a rapid maturation of the skeleton that may lead to earlier cessation of growth. Bone age should be interpreted with the guidance of a pediatric endocrinologist. Skeletal age correlates well with stage of pubertal development and may be helpful in predicting adult height in Chapter 27 • Assessment of Growth 177 early- or late-maturing adolescents. In familial short stature the bone age is normal (comparable to chronologic age), whereas constitutional delay, endocrinologic short stature, and undernutrition may be associ- ated with delay in bone age comparable to the height age. Laboratory testing is also useful in assessment of growth and may be tailored to suspected etiology based on the patient history and physical examination. Initial assessment includes comprehen- sive metabolic panel, complete blood count, sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroxine, celiac panel, and insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and IGF-BP3, which are surrogate markers for growth hormone secretion (see Chapter 595). A karyotype to exclude Turner syndrome is an essential com- ponent of the evaluation of short stature in females and should be performed even in the absence of characteristic physical features (see Chapter 626.1). If there is concern for abnormal timing of puberty contributing to growth pattern, gonadotropins (luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone), and estradiol or testosterone may also be assessed. A urinalysis can provide additional information about renal function. Evaluation by a pediatric nutritionist for caloric needs assessment may be useful in patients with malnutrition, underweight status, or slow weight gain. Additional testing and referral to special- ists should be performed as indicated. OTHER GROWTH CONSIDERATIONS Obesity affects large numbers of children (see Chapter 65). The CDC defines obesity as BMI ≥95th percentile for age and sex, and overweight as BMI 85th to <95th percentile for age and sex. Although widely accepted as the best clinical measure of underweight and overweight, BMI may not provide an accurate index of adiposity because it does not differentiate lean tissue and bone from fat. In otherwise healthy individuals, lean body mass is largely represented by BMI at lower percentiles. BMI >80-85% largely reflects increased body fat with a nonlinear relationship between BMI and adiposity. In the setting of chronic illness, increased body fat may be present at low BMI, whereas in athletes, high BMI may reflect increased muscle mass. Measure- ment of the triceps, subscapular, and suprailiac skinfold thickness have been used to estimate adiposity. Other methods of measuring fat, such as hydrodensitometry, bioelectrical impedance, and total body water measurement, are used in research, but not in clinical evaluation, but whole body dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is beginning to emerge as a tool for measuring body fat and lean body mass. Dental Development Dental development includes mineralization, eruption, and exfoliation (Table 27.4). Initial mineralization begins as early as the second trimes- ter (mean age for central incisors, 14 weeks) and continues through 3 years of age for the primary (deciduous) teeth and 25 years of age for the secondary (permanent) teeth. Mineralization begins at the crown and progresses toward the root. Eruption begins with the central inci- sors and progresses laterally. Exfoliation begins at about 6 years of age and continues through 12 years. Eruption of the permanent teeth may follow exfoliation immediately or may lag by 4-5 months. The timing of dental development is poorly correlated with other processes of growth and maturation. Delayed eruption is usually considered when no teeth have erupted by approximately 13 months of age (mean ‡ 3 SD). Common causes include congenital or genetic disorders, endo- crine disorders (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism), familial conditions, and (the most common) idiopathic conditions. Individual teeth may fail to erupt because of mechanical blockage (crowding, gum fibrosis). Causes of early exfoliation include hypophosphatasia, histio- cytosis X, cyclic neutropenia, leukemia, trauma, and idiopathic factors. Nutritional and metabolic disturbances, prolonged illness, and certain medications (tetracycline) frequently result in discoloration or malfor- mations of the dental enamel. A discrete line of pitting on the enamel suggests a time-limited insult. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

178 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 27.4 Chronology of Human Dentition of Primary (Deciduous) and Secondary (Permanent) Teeth CALCIFICATION AGE AT ERUPTION BEGINS AT COMPLETE AT MAXILLARY MANDIBULAR PRIMARY TEETH Central incisors Lateral incisors Cuspids (canines) First molars Second molars SECONDARY TEETH Central incisors Lateral incisors 5th fetal mo 5th fetal mo 6th fetal mo 5th fetal mo 6th fetal mo Cuspids (canines) First premolars (bicuspids) Second premolars (bicuspids) First molars Second molars Third molars 3-4 mo Max, 10-12 mo Mand, 3-4 mo 4-5 mo 18-21 mo 24-30 mol Birth 30-36 mo Max, 7-9 yr Mand, 8-10 yr 18-24 mo 18-24 mo 30-36 mo 24-30 mo 36 mo 9-10yr 10-11 yr 12-15yr 12-13yr 12-14 yr 9-10yr 14-16yr 18-25yr 6-8 mo 8-11 mo 16-20 mo 10-16 mo 20-30 mo 7-8yr 8-9 yr 11-12yr 10-11 yr 10-12yr 6-7 yr 12-13 yr 17-22 yr 5-7 mo 7-10 mo 16-20 mo 10-16 mo 20-30 mo 6-7 yr 7-8 yr 9-11 yr 10-12yr 11-13 yr 6-7 yr 12-13 yr 17-22 yr Mand, Mandibular; max, maxillary. Adapted from a chart prepared by P.K. Losch, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, who provided the data for this table. AGE AT SHEDDING MAXILLARY MANDIBULAR 7-8 yr 8-9 yr 11-12yr 10-12yr 10-12yr 6-7 yr 7-8 yr 9-11 yr 10-12yr 11-13 yr Chapter 28 Developmental and Behavioral Surveillance and Screening Eliza Gordon-Lipkin and Paul H. Lipkin In healthy development, a child will acquire new skills beginning pre- natally and extending into at least young adulthood. The roots of this acquisition of skills lie in the development of the nervous system, with additional influences from the health status of other organ systems and the physical and social environment in which the development occurs. Development and its milestones are divided into the "streams" of gross motor, fine motor, language (expressive and receptive), social language, and self-help. Behavior can be categorized into observable, spontaneous, and responsive behaviors in the settings of home, school, and community. Although typical development is associated with wide variability in the age of skill acquisition in each of these streams, specific develop- mental and behavioral disorders are seen in approximately 1 of 6 chil- dren and may affect the health, function, and well-being of the child and family for a lifetime. These disorders include relatively less com- mon conditions that often cause severe impairments, such as cerebral palsy and autism, and relatively common conditions such as attention- deficit/hyperactivity disorder, speech language disorders, and behav- ioral and emotional disorders that affect as many as 25% of children. The more common conditions are generally perceived as "less severe," but these too can have major short-term and long-term impact on the child's health and daily functioning in the home, school, and commu- nity and can affect lifelong well-being. Because of their high prevalence in children; their impact on health, social, and economic status; and their effect on the child, the home, and the community, these disorders require the attention of the pediatrician throughout childhood. In addi- tion, both the child and the family benefit from the early identification and treatment of many of these conditions, including the most severe. It is therefore incumbent on the primary care clinician to conduct regular developmental surveillance and periodic developmental screening at health supervision visits aimed at early identification and treatment. Among the many types of developmental or behavioral conditions, the most common include language problems, affecting at least 10% of children (see Chapter 53); behavior or emotional disorders, affecting up to 25% of children, with 6% considered serious; attention-deficit/hyper- activity disorder, affecting 10% of children (Chapter 50); and learning disabilities, affecting up to 10% (Chapters 51 and 52). Less common and more disabling are the intellectual disabilities (1-2%; Chapter 56); autism spectrum disorders (1 in 36 children; Chapter 58); cere- bral palsy and related motor impairments (0.3%, or 1 in 345 children; Chapter 638.1); hearing impairment, also referred to as deafness, hard- of-hearing, or hearing loss (0.12%; Chapters 55 and 677); and nonre- fractive vision impairment (0.8%; Chapter 661). DEVELOPMENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL SURVEILLANCE General health surveillance is a critical responsibility of the primary care clinician and is a key component of health supervision visits. Reg- ular developmental and behavioral surveillance should be performed at every health supervision visit from infancy through young adult- hood. Surveillance of a child's development and behavior includes both obtaining historical information on the child and family and making observations at the office visit (Tables 28.1 and 28.2). Key historical elements include (1) eliciting and attending to the parents' or caregivers' concerns around the child's development or behavior; (2) obtaining a history of the child's developmental skills and behavior at home, with peers, in school, and in the community; and (3) identifying the risks, strengths, and protective factors for development and behavior in the child and family, including the social determi- nants of health. During the office visit, the clinician should make and document direct observations of the child's developmental skills and behavioral interactions. Skills in all streams of development should be considered along with observations of related neurologic functioning made on physical examination. With this history and observation, the clinician should create and maintain a longitudinal record of the child's development and behavior for tracking the child across visits. It is often helpful to obtain infor- mation from and share information with other professionals involved 

Chapter 28 • Developmental and Behavioral Surveillance and Screening 179 Table 28.1 Key Components of Developmental and Behavioral Surveillance HISTORY 1. Parental developmental concerns 2. Developmental history a. Streams of developmental milestone achievement i. Gross motor ii. Fine motor iii. Verbal speech and language (1) Expressive (2) Receptive iv. Social language and self-help b. Patterns of abnormality i. Delay il. Dissociation iii. Deviation or deviant development iv. Regression 3. Behavior history a. Interactions i. Familiar settings (e.g., home, school): parents, siblings, other familiar people, peers, other children ii. Interaction in unfamiliar settings (e.g., community): unfamiliar adults and children b. Patterns of abnormality I. Noncompliance, disruption (including tantrums), aggression, impulsivity, increased activity, decreased attention span decreased social engagement, decreased auditory or visual attention ii. Deviation or atypical behaviors (1) Repetitive play, rituals, perseverative thought or action, self-injury 4. Risk factor identification: medical, family, and social history (including social determinants of health) 5. Protective factor identification (also including social determinants) DEVELOPMENTAL OBSERVATION 1. Movement: gross and fine motor skills 2. Verbal communication: expressive speech and language, language understanding 3. Social engagement and response 4. Behavior: spontaneous and responsive with caregiver and with staff 5. Related neurologic function on physical examination Table 28.2 Red Flags in Developmental Screening and Surveillance These indicators suggest that development is significantly delayed or disordered and that the child should be referred to a developmental pediatrician or pediatric neurologist. Any delay in achieving a milestone at the 75th percentile may be considered a red flag and merits further evaluation, vigilant surveillance, or repeat screening. POSITIVE INDICATORS Presence of any of the following: Loss of developmental skills at any age Parental or professional concerns about vision, fixing, or following an object or a confirmed visual impairment at any age (simultaneous referral to pediatric ophthalmology) Hearing loss at any age (simultaneous referral for expert audiologic or ear, nose, and throat assessment) Persistently low muscle tone or floppiness (check creatine kinase) No speech by 15 mo, especially if the child does not try to communicate by other means, such as gestures (simultaneous referral for urgent hearing test) Asymmetry of movements or other features suggestive of cerebral palsy, such as increased muscle tone Persistent toe walking Multiple organ involvement Head circumference above the 99.6th centile or below 0.4th centile; also, if circumference has crossed 2 centiles (up or down) on the appropriate chart or is disproportionate to parental head circumference NEGATIVE INDICATORS Activities that the child cannot do: Sit unsupported by 12 mo Walk by 18 mo (check creatine kinase) Walk other than on tiptoes Run by 24 mo Hold object placed in hand by 4 mo (corrected for gestation) Reach for objects by 6 mo (corrected for gestation) Points to show you something interesting by 18 months Adapted from Horridge KA. Assessment and investigation of the child with disordered development. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2011;96:9-20; Zubler JM, Wiggins LD, Macias MM, et al. Evidence-informed milestones for developmental surveillance tools. Pediatrics. 2022;149(3):2021052138. with the child, including childcare professionals, home visitors, teach- ers, after-school providers, and developmental therapists. This provides a complete picture of the child's development and behavior and allows collaborative tracking of the child's progress. The Developmental and Behavioral Histories Developmental surveillance includes tracking a child's achievement of milestones, which represent key readily recognizable skills that usu- ally occur in a predictable sequence and at predictable age ranges dur- ing childhood. The developmental skill areas can be divided into gross motor, fine motor, speech and language (expressive and receptive), social language, and self-help. Tracking milestones will reveal that most children achieve the milestones in a typical pattern and within typical age ranges. However, the pediatrician or the parent may recog- nize concerning patterns of development, such as delay, dissociation, deviation, or regression. Developmental delay occurs when development is occurring in its usual sequence but at a slower rate, with milestones achieved later than the normal range (see Chapter 56). Delay can occur in a single area of development or across several streams and can be expressed as a devel- opmental quotient (DQ). The DQ is calculated by dividing the age at which the child is functioning developmentally (developmental age; DA) by chronologic age (CA) and multiplying by 100 (DQ = DA/CA × 100). A DQ of 100 indicates that the child is developing at the mean or aver- age rate, whereas a DQ below 70 is associated with delays of 2 or more standard deviations from the mean and suggests a significant delay that requires further evaluation. Developmental dissociation indicates delay in a single stream with typical development in other streams. A child with autism may have delays in verbal or social language but normal motor skills. Deviation or deviant development is defined by development occurring out of sequence, as when a child stands before sitting (as in diplegic cerebral palsy) or has better expressive vocabulary than receptive understand- ing of words (language and autism spectrum disorders). Regression refers to a loss of skills. It may also be identified earlier or more subtly by a slowing or lack of advancement in skills. Although regression is uncommon in most developmental disabilities, regression is described in as many as 25% of children with autism and is also seen in rarer neurologic disorders, such as Rett syndrome and Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Behavioral surveillance is conducted by obtaining a history of a child's behavior and interactions across settings, including home, day- care, school, and community, and in situations such as eating, sleeping, and play. In addition, interactions may differ based on who the child is with (parent or guardian, sibling, peers, teachers, strangers). Concerns may include limited engagement or socializing, compliance, tantrums, aggression, destruction, impulsivity, high activity level, decreased auditory or visual attention, and short attention span. Deviations from 

180 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 28.3 Standardized Tools for General Developmental Screening SCREENING TEST* AGE RANGE ITEMS (NO.) Ages & Stages Questionnaires-3 2-66 mo 30 (ASQ3) Parents' Evaluation of Developmental 0-8 yr 10 Status (PEDS) Parents' Evaluation of Developmental Status: Developmental Milestones (PEDS:DM) Screening Version? Survey of Well-Being of Young Children (SWYC)3-6 0-8 yr 6-8 items at each age level Dev: 10 Autism: 7 ADMIN TIME (MIN) 10-15 2-10 4-6 PUBLICATION INFORMATION Paul H. Brookes Publishing www.agesandstages.com Ellsworth & Vandermeer Press 877-296-9972 www.pedstest.com Ellsworth & Vandermeer Press 877-296-9972 www.pedstest.com www.theswyc.org Dev: 1-65 mo Autism: 16-35 mo Dev. <5 Autism: <5 Squires J, Potter L, Bricker D. The ASQ User's Guide, 3rd ed, Baltimore, MD, Paul H. Brookes Publishing, 2009. 2Glascoe FP, Marks KP, Poon JK, et al. (eds). Identifying and addressing developmental-behavioral problems: a practical guide for medical and non-medical professionals, trainees, researchers and advocates. Nolensville, TN: PEDStest.com, 2013. 3Sheldrick RC, Perrin EC. Evidence-based milestones for surveillance of cognitive, language, and motor development. Acad Pediatr. 2013, 13(6):577-556. 4Smith N, Sheldrick R, Perrin E. An abbreviated screening instrument for autism spectrum disorders. Infant Ment Health J. 2012;34(2): 149-155. §Salisbury LA, Nyce JD, Hannum CD, et al. Sensitivity and specificity of 2 autism screeners among referred children between 16 and 48 months of age. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2018;39(3):254-258. Publications and user's manual available at www.theswyc.org usual behavior may also occur, including repetitive play, ritualistic behaviors, perseverative thoughts or actions, and self-injury. Observation Observations of the child's developmental skills and behavioral inter- actions should be made in the examining room, with documentation in the medical record, and combined with the examination of other neurologic functioning, such as muscle tone, reflexes, and posture. Developmental observations may include a child's gross and fine motor movements, both on the floor and on the examination table. Spoken language and response to others communications, as well as interactions and engagement with the parent or guardian, should be noted. If siblings are in the room, the interaction between the child and a sibling may also be informative. Impulsivity, attention prob- lems, tantrums, noncompliance, oppositionality, and aggression may be observed along with interactions with the clinician, but one should inquire about whether these behaviors are seen in other settings, given the possible unfamiliarity or discomfort of the child with the health- care professional or in healthcare settings. If inquiring about and observing the child's development and behav- ior suggests normal or typical patterns of development and behavior, discussions can be held about future milestones and usual behavior management strategies employable at home. If problems or concerns are identified by the parent or clinician, however, formal developmen- tal screening, evaluation, or management should be considered, along with early follow-up and review. DEVELOPMENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCREENING Periodic episodic screening for developmental and behavioral con- ditions should be conducted on every child, as done for other health conditions such as anemia, lead poisoning, hearing, and congenital metabolic disorders. Developmental and behavioral screenings are centered on administration of low-cost, brief, and standardized tests in the primary care setting. These tests can be implemented by health assistants at age-determined visits, with interpretation of the results and referral or treatment initiation by the primary care clinician as indicated. The American Academy of Pediatrics provides recommenda- tions and guidelines on age-specific developmental screening for implementation in the primary care medical home. Developmental screening using a formal, validated, and standardized test is recom- mended during health supervision visits at 9, 18, and 30 months. Tests recommended at these ages screen development across all the streams. In addition, an autism screening test is recommended at the 18 and 24 month visits. Tables 28.3 and 28.4 provide recom- mended screening tests for general development and for autism. It is also recommended that a child have a screening test administered any time that a parent, guardian, or child health or early childhood professional has concerns identified during developmental sur- veillance, or through screening performed at early childhood pro- grams. Although routine formal screening before the child's entry into elementary school is not included in current guidelines, the primary care clinician should be vigilant about surveillance regard- ing development at the 4 or 5 year old visit and perform formal screening if concerns are identified, because of the potential impact on learning and school services. Each of the screening visits offers special opportunities to identify specific developmental conditions. At the 9 month screening, critical areas of development are vision, hearing, gross motor, fine motor, and receptive language. It is at this age that disabilities may be identified in vision or hearing, as well as cerebral palsy and other neuromotor disor- ders. At 18 months, expressive language and social language develop- ment are particularly important areas. Conditions identified at this age may include those considered at 9 months, although in milder forms, as well as autism spectrum, language, and intellectual disorders. By the 30 month visit, the child's behavioral interactions become an additional area of focus, with problems emerging tied to attention and disruptive behavior disorders. Although universal screening is not recommended at later ages, developmental surveillance may identify children in need of screening or evaluation for problems in learning, attention, and Additional screening for behavioral conditions should be considered, although there is currently no recommended consensus on the ages at which behavioral screening should occur. One possibility would be to provide behavioral screening at the 30 month, 4 or 5 year, and 8 year visits to identify problems emerging in the toddler, preschool, and early elementary years. For older children, visits during preadolescent or adolescent ages also offer an opportunity for surveillance and pos- sible screening for behavioral and emotional problems meriting pro- fessional assistance or intervention. Table 28.5 provides recommended behavior screening tools. Evidence-Based Tools Tables 28.3, 28.4, and 28.5 show a range of measures useful for early identification of developmental and behavioral problems. Because well-child visits are brief and with broad agendas (health 

Chapter 28 • Developmental and Behavioral Surveillance and Screening 181 Table 28.4 Standardized Tools for Language and Autism Screening SCREENING TEST* Communication and Symbolic Behavior Scales: Developmental Profile (CSBS-DP): Infant Toddler Checklist' AGE RANGE 6 mo-6 years (for language function 6-24 mol ITEMS (NO.) 24 Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, 16-48 mo ADMIN TIME (MIN) PUBLICATION INFORMATION 5-10 Paul H. Brookes Publishing 800-638-3775 www.brookespublishing.com www.mchatscreen.com Revised with Follow-up (M-CHAT-R/F) 20 plus follow- up interview 5-10 Screening Tool for Autism in Toddlers and 24-35 mo 12 (avg) 20-30 https://stat.vueinnovations.com Young Children (STAT)3,4 Social Communication Questionnaire 4+ yr 40 (avg) 5-10 (SCQ)5,6 Western Psychological Services www.wospublish.com *Key reference sources: "Wetherby AM, Prizant BM. Communication and Symbolic Behavior Scales: developmental profile. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing, 2002. 2Robins DL, Casagrande K, Barton M, et al. Validation of the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, Revised with Follow-up (M-CHAT-R/F). Pediatrics. 2014;133(1):37-45. 3Stone WL, Coonrod EE, Ousley O. Brief report: screening tool for autism in 2-year-olds (STAT): development and preliminary data. J Autism Dev Disord. 2000;30:607-612 *Stone WL, Coonrod EE, Turner LM, Pozdol SL. Psychometric properties of the STAT for early autism screening. J Autism Dev Disord. 2004;34:691-701. 5Rutter M, Bailey A, Lord C: The Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ) Manual. Los Angeles; Western Psychological Services, 2003. •Corsello C, Hus V, Pickles A, et al. Between a ROC and a hard place: decision making and making decisions about using the SCQ. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2007;48(9):932-940. Table 28.5 SCREENING TEST* Ages & Stages Questionnaire: Social-Emotional-2 (ASQ:SE-2' (2015)1,2 Brief Infant Toddler Social Emotional Assessment (BITSEA)3 Pediatric Symptom Checklist-17 items (PSC-17b)4 Standardized Tools for General Behavioral Screening AGE RANGE 2-72 mo 12-36 mo ITEMS (NO.) ADMIN TIME (MIN) 9 age-specific 10 forms with 19-33 items 42 7-10 PUBLICATION INFORMATION Paul H. Brookes Publishing 800-638-3775 www.agesandstages.com Mapi Research Trust https://eprovide.mapi-trust.org/ 4-16 yr PSC-35 Youth self-report: ≥11 yr 17 <5 Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)5 4-17 yr 3-4 yr old version available Youth self-report 11-16 yr 25; 22 for 3-4yr olds 5-10 Massachusetts General Hospital https://www.massgeneral.org/psychiatry/ treatments-and-services/pediatric- symptom-checklist www.sdqinfo.org Squires J, Bricker DD, Twombly E. Ages & Stages Questionnaires: Social-Emotional-2 (ASQ:SE-2): a parent-completed, child-monitoring system for social-emotional behaviors. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing, 2016. Briggs RD, Stettler EM, Johnson Silver E, et al. Social-emotional screening for infants and toddlers in primary care. Pediatrics. 2012; 129(2): 1-8. 3Briggs-Gowan MJ, Carter AS, McCarthy K, et al. Clinical validity of a brief measure of early childhood social-emotional/behavioral problems. J Pediatr Psychol. 2013;38(5):557-587. *Murphy JM, Stepanian S, Riobueno-Naylor A, et al. Implementation of an electronic approach to psychosocial screening in a network of pediatric practices. Acad Pediatr. *Stone LL, Otten R, Engels RC, et al. Psychometric properties of the parent and teacher versions of the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire for 4- to 12-year-olds: a review. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2010;13(3):254-274. surveillance and screening, physical examination, immunization, anticipatory guidance, safety and injury prevention, and develop- mental promotion), tools relying on parent completion with office staff administration and scoring are well suited for primary care settings. Such tests may be completed in advance of appointments, either online or in writing, whether at home or while waiting for the pediatric visit to begin. If a test is scored in advance of the visit, the pediatric clinician can enter the room with results in hand for review and discussion, including a description of the child's devel- opment and behavior compared with peers, general information on child development and behavior, any areas of concern, refer- rals needed, and information to share with the child's daycare, pre- school, or other community providers, when applicable. children with typical development. These norms allow comparison of an individual childs performance on the test with that of the large sam- ple of typically developing children. In addition, the tests demonstrate accepted standards of reliability, or the ability to produce consistent results; predictive validity, or the ability to predict later test perfor- mance or development; sensitivity, or accuracy in the identication of delayed development or disability; and specincity, or accuracy in the identification of children who are not delayed. Some of the screening tests are general, evaluating multiple areas of development or behavior (sometimes referred to as "broad band"). Others are domain specific, evaluating one area of development (e.g., language), or disorder spe- cific, aimed at identifying a specific developmental disorder (some- times referred to as "narrow band"). Screening Test Properties Each of the tests provided in Tables 28.3 to 28.5 meets accepted psycho- metric test criteria. The test has standardized questions or milestones with norms based on administration to parents of a large sample of BEYOND SURVEILLANCE AND SCREENING Comprehensive Evaluation When a developmental or behavioral concern is identified through surveillance or screening, the primary care clinician's role is to 

182 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior ensure that the child receives an appropriate diagnostic evaluation, related medical testing, and indicated developmental interven- tions and medical treatment. When a concern is identified, a full diagnostic evaluation should be performed by a professional with appropriate training and experience. In the case of developmental concerns, this may be a pediatric specialist, such as a neurodevel- opmental pediatrician/neurologist or a developmental-behavioral pediatrician, or a related developmental professional, depending on resources in the local community. Related professionals may include early childhood educators, psychologists, speech/language patholo- gists, audiologists, physical therapists, and occupational therapists, many of whom are available through the local early intervention system. Such an evaluation would typically include more detailed standardized developmental testing. The primary care physician should ensure that hearing and vision assessments are completed For the child with motor concerns, the physician should pay par- ticular attention to the motor and neurologic evaluation. Children with language delays should have hearing, speech, language, and learning skills (e.g., reading, phonics) evaluated. The primary care clinician should also perform a comprehensive medical evaluation of the child to identify any related health condi- tions. Physical examination including head circumference should be reviewed to identify growth abnormalities and dysmorphic features. For the child with motor delay and decreased or normal muscle tone, serum creatine kinase and thyroid function testing are recommended to rule out muscular dystrophy and thyroid dis- ease, respectively. When there is increased tone, MRI or referral to a neurologist should be considered. For the child with suspected autism or intellectual disability (or global developmental delay), chromosomal microarray and fragile X testing are recommended (see Chapter 56). Referral and Intervention Children with significant developmental delays or an identified developmental disability are entitled to and usually benefit from early intervention with therapy services directed at delayed or atypical development. The U.S. Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) entitles any child with a disability or developmental delay to receive local education and related services, including therapy, from as early as birth, for known or high-risk conditions that lead to such delay or disability, through age 21 years. These interventions enhance the child's development through early intervention and fam- ily support as well as individualized public education with the goal of improving long-term functional outcomes and reducing public costs. The pediatric provider should therefore refer every child with developmental concerns to the local early intervention program or agency (ages 0-3 years), public school program (≥ 3 years), and/or local therapy providers. Typical service needs include special educa- tion for the child with intellectual or learning concerns, physical or occupational therapy for children with motor delays, speech language therapy for the child with language or social communication difficul- ties, and behavioral therapy services for the child with social engage- ment or other behavior problems. Likewise, the child with specific behavior concerns should be referred to an appropriate pediatric or behavioral health professional who can perform a thorough evaluation and assist the family to allevi- ate the problems or concerns. Such professionals may include those trained in developmental-behavioral pediatrics, neurodevelopmen- tal disabilities, adolescent medicine, child and adolescent psychiatry, pediatric psychology, psychiatric advanced practice nursing, and social work. Such an evaluation is similar to developmental evaluation in its aim of determining a diagnosis, as well as developing a treatment program that may include psychotherapeutic and medication manage- ment. Associated medical or developmental disorders should be con- sidered and further evaluated as needed. Ongoing Management Children with developmental or behavioral disorders should be iden- tihed as children with special healthcare needs in the medical home, with a program of chronic condition management initiated by the clinical program staff, including its medical and nonmedical staff. In doing so, the clinician and family should work together to outline the child's short- and long-term goals and management plan. This includes a program of regular monitoring and follow-up of the child's development and behavior, referrals, treatment, and surveillance for identification and treatment of related medical, developmental, or behavioral comorbidities that may arise. Some children and families may warrant assignment of a case manager or care navigator either within the medical home or in a related local agency. The pediat- ric clinician or other medical home staff should participate in care coordination activities as needed and assist the family and other pro- fessionals in decision-making on medical care, therapies, and educa- The family can be further assisted during the screening and refer- ral phases or later with ongoing care by referral to support service programs, such as respite care, parent-to-parent programs, and advocacy organizations. Some children may qualify for additional state or federal benefit programs, including insurance, supplemen- tal security income, and state programs for children with special healthcare needs. Families often seek out information, support, or connection to other families with similarly affected children and find benefit in local or national networks (e.g., Family Voices, Fam- ily to Family Health Information centers) and condition-specific Implementation The principles and professional guidelines for developmental- behavioral surveillance and screening have been solidified to iden- tify children with developmental disabilities, including the specific conditions of intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, motor disorders, and behavioral-emotional problems. Specific algo- rithms are included in these guidelines to assist the clinician with implementation. However, primary care clinicians have reported difficulties in putting these into practice, with obstacles and barri- ers identified and policy changes made to ensure that screening and referral can be implemented. (See Bibliography online for specific Implementation projects have identified key factors for success- ful incorporation of developmental surveillance and screening into practice. Successful office-based screening requires develop- ment of a comprehensive office-based system that extends from the child's home to the front office and into the clinic visit, rather than solely centered on the time in the clinic room. This requires utilizing office and medical support staff for scheduling, advance test distribution, and initiation of the surveillance and screening procedures before the health supervision visit. The practice must choose screening tests that are not only valid for screening of the specific condition at the recommended ages, but also appropriate to the population being served (including reading level and language). The tests chosen should be able to be completed by the caregiver in a short time and at low cost. Staff training on billing and coding for these procedures ensures appropriate payment. Practice systems should also be developed for referral and track- ing of children who have problems identified through screening. This should include systems for referral to early intervention, community therapy, developmental professionals, and medical consultants. Office representatives or the clinician should establish working relationships with local community programs and resources to assist the child and Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Chapter 29 Child Care Laura Stout Sosinsky and Walter S. Gilliam Child care impacts the health and development of children and the economic stability of families. For too many young children and their families, affordable high-quality child care is not accessible. Pediatri- cians have a role in helping children receive safe, enriching care in high-quality early childhood education (ECE) settings that allows par- ents to be able to work. As an environment in which children learn, grow, and play, child care is a component of the social determinants of health. The major- ity of young children regularly spend time in at least one nonparental child care arrangement. Routine exposure to high-quality child care provides an opportunity for early education in language, early lit- eracy, math, and social skills, as well as for teaching children health- promoting behaviors and for identifying early signs of delays or special needs. Inadequate child care supply and poor availability block these opportunities for many children, disproportionately those from low- resourced families. Instead, many young children are exposed to a patchwork of child care arrangements that are unstable, unaffordable, and often poorly resourced, adding stress that harms child and family Child care provision is affected by many factors, derived from fam- ily demand, child care supply, and child/family policy. With increasing movement of mothers into the workplace across the globe, the prime reason most families use child care is to support employment of both parents. After childbirth, unpaid maternity leave is the typical situa- tion among U.S. mothers. The U.S. federal leave program allows for 12 weeks of unpaid job-protected leave during pregnancy or after child- birth, but only covers approximately 50% of the workforce because companies with <50 employees, with part-time employees, and those working in informal labor markets are exempt. Several states and cities have passed paid family leave laws. In part because of the financial burden of an unpaid maternity leave, many mothers return to work, and their children may begin child care in the first few weeks after birth. In a 2000 Family and Medical Leave Act survey, only 10% of respondents reported taking more than 60 days for maternity leave. Approximately 44% of mothers in 2005-2007 were working by the time their first child was 3-4 months of age, and approx- imately 63% of mothers were working by the time their first child was 12 months. Some mothers face work requirements if they are receiving public benefits because of the reforms to welfare passed by the U.S. Congress in 1996. Many mothers feel strong financial motivation or even pressure to work, especially in single-parent households, or have strong incentive to work for short- and long-term financial security. Employment is not the only factor driving child care use; young chil- dren of unemployed mothers spend on average 21 hours per week in child care. Many parents want their children to have child care experi- ences for the potential benefits that early learning environments can give to their children. Given these realities, child care quality is of great concern, yet the quality of child care and early education environ- ments varies widely, and the supply of high-quality child care is largely deemed inadequate. The COVID-19 pandemic revealed the fragility of America's child care system. Relative to adults, young children have been far less likely to suffer severe medical complications from coronavirus infection, and rates of transmission in child care facilities that followed mitiga- tion protocols have been low. However, the downstream effects of the pandemic on young children have been acute. Burdensome child care cost and access barriers became exaggerated. Parents of young chil- dren report significant concerns about their children's safety and edu- cation during the pandemic and describe significant disruptions and impacts on families' well-being. Estimates indicate that 1 in every 500 Chapter 29 • Child Care 183 U.S. children have experienced COVID-19 orphanhood or the loss of a caregiving grandparent, further highlighting a crisis in early childhood caregiving. QUALITY, PROVISION, REGULATION, AND ACCESS Child Care Quality High-quality child care is characterized by warm, responsive, and stimulating interactions between children and child care providers. These caregivers express positive feelings toward the children; are emo- tionally involved, engaged, and aware of the child's needs and sensitive and responsive to their initiations; speak directly with children in a manner that is elaborative and stimulating while being age-appropriate; and ask questions and encourage children's ideas and verbalizations. Structural quality features of the setting, including ratio of children to adults, group size, and caregiver education and training, act indirectly on child outcomes by facilitating high-quality interactions. It would be highly unlikely, if not impossible, for even the most sensitive and stimulating provider to engage in high-quality interactions with each child, if, for example, the provider was the sole caregiver of 10 toddlers. Poor-quality child care settings and unsafe environments that do not meet children's basic physical and emotional needs can result in developmental delays tied to lack of healthy relationships with adults or developmentally inappropriate activities, toxic stress, neglect, or injury or death from fire, building hazards, disease, and inadequate staff over- sight. State regulations put a "floor" on structural quality and basic staff indicators to mitigate risks and safeguard health and safety. Although structural indicators are more easily monitored in licensing, some but not all research suggests only modest relationships of structural indi- cators with child outcomes. When it comes to process quality, a body of studies demonstrates small-to-modest associations with short-term child development and some evidence of long-term impacts. The early childhood field is focusing increasingly on effective prac- tices, evidence-based curricula, and programs that are reported to have moderate-to-large effects on child outcomes. Some specific teacher practices are related to gains in academic and social-emotional skills among preschool students. Evidence-informed and evaluated ECE curricula with aligned professional development can have substantial impacts on child outcomes across several developmental domains. Primary caregiving, the practice in infant and toddler classrooms of assigning one teacher the primary responsibility for the care of a small group of children and developing relationships with their fami- lies, is consistent with research showing that infants who experience stable, consistent, sensitive and responsive care develop more secure attachment relationships and more positive developmental outcomes. Family engagement, in which early educators partner with families to share their unique knowledge of each child to build positive and goal- oriented relationships, relates to gains in preschool children's social and early academic skills and reduced problem behaviors. Integration of Health and Safety Within Quality The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the American Public Health Association, and the National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care and Early Education provide health and safety guidelines in Caring for Our Children (CFOC): National Health and Safety Performance Standards; Guidelines for Early Care and Education Programs, 4th ed. (https://nckids.org/CFOC; 2019). These national standards represent the best evidence on quality practices and address health and safety as an integrated component of early care and education. The intent is for the guidelines to serve as a resource for states and other entities to improve health and safety standards in licensing and quality rating improvement systems. An additional objective is for the various monitoring agencies and mechanisms to work together to collaboratively sateguard children and minimize or eliminate the duplication and burden of complicated and sometimes conflicting procedures and requirements. The current guidelines include sections in 10 areas (Table 29.1). The National Resource Center also provides updated online resources: (1) up-to-date CFOC Standards Online Database (https://nrckids. org/CFOC and (2) a crosswalk of COVID-19 questions with CFOC 

184 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 29.1 Caring for Our Children Performance Standards: Chapters and Topics 1. Staffing: Child-staff ratio, group size, minimum age; background checks (criminal history, sex offender registry, and child abuse and neglect registry checks), qualifications, professional development, training 2. Program Activities for Healthy Development: Developmental activities (general and by age), supervision and discipline, parent/guardian relationships, health education 3. Health Promotion and Protection: Health promotion in child care (health checks and supervision, physical activity, limiting screen time, safe sleep, oral health); hygiene (diapering, hand hygiene, exposure to bodily fluids); cleaning, sanitizing, and disinfecting; tobacco and drug use; animals; emergency procedures; child abuse and neglect; sun safety and insect repellent; strangulation hazards; management of illness 4. Nutrition and Food Service: General and by age, meal service, seating, and supervision, nutrition learning experiences for children and for parents/guardians, food safety, and more 5. Facilities, Supplies, Equipment, and Environmental Health: Space per child, exits, ventilation, lighting, noise, furnishings, equipment, and more 6. Play Areas/Playgrounds and Transportation: Playground equipment, water play areas, toys 7. Infectious Diseases: Immunizations, respiratory tract infections, enteric (diarrheal) infections and hepatitis A virus, skin and mucous membrane infections, blood-borne infections, herpes viruses, interaction with state or local health departments, judicious use of antibiotics 8. Children with Special Healthcare Needs and Disabilities: Inclusion, service plans, coordination and documentation, periodic reevaluation, assessment of facilities for children with special needs, additional standards 9. Administration: Governance, policies, human resources, records 10. Licensing and Community Action: Regulatory policy, licensing agency, facility licensing, health department responsibilities and role, caregiver/teacher support, public policy issues and resource development From the American Academy of Pediatrics, American Public Health Association, National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care and Early Education. Caring for Our Children: National Health and Safety Performance Standards; Guidelines for Early Care and Education Programs. 4th ed., Itasca, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2019. (https://nrckids.org/CFOC/TOC). standards (https://nrckids.org/files/CFOC.Crosswalk.pdf) to help child care health consultants and providers learn how the CFOC stan- dards address provision of safe and healthy early care and education environments during the COVID-19 pandemic. Child Care Settings and Use Public early education programs (such as Head Start and targeted state- funded prekindergarten programs) have historically been designed as policy mechanisms to close the school readiness gap among children with fewer resources, whereas child care has been seen as necessary when par- ents (usually mothers) work while their children are young. Despite these historical "silos, all early care and education settings serve both purposes: they are early learning environments for children and necessary supports for working parents. Quality of care matters for all child care settings, but there are key differences in the structure and provision of care that influence organi- zational and business operations, regulatory mandates, and accessibil- ity and affordability for families. Child care settings vary widely and fall into four broad categories from the least to the most formal: 1. Relative or friend cares for a child in the relative's or friend's home or 2. Nonrelative care who comes to the child's home, such as nannies, babysitters, or au pairs 3. Home-based child care in which an individual runs a child care business in their own home and cares for a few or several children, often includ- ing children of mixed ages, siblings, or the provider's own children 4. Center-based care, provided in nonresidential facilities for children grouped by age, including preschools, prekindergarten programs, Head Start centers, and child care centers. Child care centers and early education programs are administered by a wide array of businesses and organizations, including for-profit providers or companies, religious organizations, public and private schools includ- ing early childhood special education programs, nonprofits and other community organizations, cooperatives, employer-based child care, and public agencies. Increasingly, publicly funded prekindergarten programs contract with existing community-based centers and home-based provid- ers for program delivery. With a few exceptions (such as faith-affiliated child care), center-based child care programs must satisfy state licensing laws for safety practices. For other child care options, governmental over- sight for health and safety is rarer; many home-based child care programs are licensed, whereas many others are unknown to regulatory agencies, and family, friend, and nanny care are almost never regulated. Child care licensing and regulation is described in the next section. Approximately 59% of children 5 years and younger and not yet in kindergarten were in at least 1 weekly nonparental child care arrangement, as reported by their parents in the U.S. Census Bureau's 2019 National Household Education Surveys Program. Forty-two percent of children less than 1 year of age, 55% of 1-2 year olds, and 74% of 3-5 year olds were in nonparental care. Nearly 60% of those in at least one child care arrangement were in a center- based arrangement, 38% were in relative care, and 20% were in non- relative care in a private home; children may have been in more than one type of arrangement. Center-based arrangements were most common among preschoolers, whereas relative care arrange- ments were most common among infants. Child Care Closures The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated a worsening trend of child care closures. In 2012, there were approximately 129,000 center-based pro- grams serving 6.98 million children from birth through age 5. Between 2014 and 2017, the number of licensed child care programs of all types in the United States decreased to approximately 109,000 centers. The number of listed home-based providers (which includes licensed or otherwise regulated providers) decreased by about 25% between 2012 and 2019. In response to COVID-19, by April 2020 new state public health requirements resulted in closing 70% of U.S. child care centers; more than 35% of child care workers became unemployed. Reasons for this include COVID-19 outbreaks and preventative health protocols such as social distancing with limits in group sizes and child:staff ratios. As the pandemic continued, reasons for new or even permanent closures included staffing shortages as well as business models that cannot sup- port a program's financial survival at low enrollment rates. However, child masking within the first year of the pandemic was associated with a 13-14% reduction in child care closure rates. Licensing, Regulation, Monitoring, and Accreditation State and territory licensing agencies enumerate which providers are subject to licensing to legally operate and monitor those providers' compliance with foundational, mandated regulations to protect chil- dren's safety, health, and well-being. Many states and territories also offer systems of child care monitoring that are usually voluntary in nature, such as quality rating and improvement systems (QRIS), and various professional organizations offer voluntary accreditation sys- tems to assess whether providers meet higher-quality standards, often (but not always) requiring licensure as a prerequisite to participation. Licensing Licensing and regulatory requirements establish the minimum requirements necessary to protect the health and safety of children in 

child care. Typically, these include basic health and safety standards such as sanitary practices, child and provider vaccinations, access to a healthcare professional, and facilities and equipment hazards and safety, as well as basic structural and caregiver characteristics such as background checks, the ratio of children to staff, group sizes, and minimum caregiver education and training requirements. Most child care centers and preschools and many family child care providers are subject to state licensing and regulation. All states regulate child care centers, as does the District of Columbia, and most states regulate fam- ily child care providers. Pediatricians are encouraged to learn about their own states child care licensing rules. Large differences between states mean large differ- ences in allowable levels of quality. The most common child:staff ratios are 4:1 for infants, 6:1 for toddlers, and 10:1 for preschoolers. However, some states permit ratios that are 5:1 or 6:1 for infants 9 months of age State and territory child care licensing regulations are maintained in a searchable National Database of Child Care Licensing Regulations (https://childcareta.acf.hhs.gov/licensing) by the National Center on Early Childhood Quality Assurance (NCECQA). The site provides a tool for searching state and territory licensing regulations and agency contact information. Licensing requirements are frequently updated. Unlicensed settings and even licensed providers in states with low licensing and regulatory standards may be providing care at quality lev- els below professional recommendations. Moreover, various types of programs may be exempt from licensure, such as faith-affiliated child care programs, and exemptions are specific to each state; as many as one third of child care centers are legally exempt in some states. Cen- ters are often exempted if care is offered by other organizations such as school districts that provide external oversight. The smallest homes (three or four children in care) are often license-exempt, encompassing relative, friend, and neighbor caregivers as well as babysitters, nannies, and au pairs. Some of these providers and the families who use them may not even think of themselves as providing "child care." The Child Care Development Block Grant (CCDBG) reauthorization in 2014 required states and territories to expand their monitoring of legally exempt providers to protect the health and safety of children receiving subsidized child care. Most states require exempt centers and family child care homes to meet some licensure requirements such as back- ground checks and to receive an annual inspection to receive child care subsidy payments. Other Quality Monitoring Systems Several voluntary public and private initiatives require that child care settings meet their own sets of guidelines and regulations in areas considered critical to effective practice and child outcomes to receive either state or federal funding. These diverse initiatives include those that focus on nutrition (the Child and Adult Care Food Program [CACFP]), inclusion (the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA]), and financial assistance to low-income working parents (child care subsidies through the CCDBG). Most states have quality initiatives called QRIS. Publicly funded early education programs, including the federal Head Start and Early Head Start program as well as state and local public prekindergarten have their own program per- formance standards. Participating providers benefit in ways that may include technical assistance supports, professional development, and additional funding often tied to the numbers of children served under the program. About 75% of early care and education centers report receiving funds from multiple sources. Providers may also value earning a public-facing "seal of approval" to help families learn about higher-quality programs. These programs all monitor eligibility and compliance with program standards. For example, Head Start and most of the state prekindergar- ten programs that restrict enrollment to low-income families require verification of family eligibility (although some states' and cities' pre- kindergarten programs are universally available to all preschool-age children regardless of family income). Other eligibility standards include verification of parental employment for child care subsidies or verification of nutritious food for low-income families for receipt of Chapter 29 • Child Care 185 CACFP funds. Other monitoring may cover staffing, meals and snacks, curricula and teaching, and other areas of service delivery. QRIS sys- tems work within the infrastructure of the early care and education system to assess, incentivize, and support higher levels of quality. Examples of incentives and supports include tiered subsidy reimburse- ment systems in which participating providers who achieve levels of quality beyond basic licensing requirements are entitled to higher sub- sidy payments, public funding to facilitate accreditation, professional development systems and coaching, and program assessments and technical assistance. Accreditation A smaller portion of providers become accredited by National Asso- ciation for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC), National Association for Family Child Care (NAFCC), or other organizations by voluntarily meeting high-quality, developmentally appropriate, professionally recommended standards. The accreditation process goes beyond health and safety practices and structural and caregiver characteristics to examine the quality of child-caregiver interactions. Evidence indicates that child care programs that complete voluntary accreditation through NAEYC provide an environment that better facilitates children's overall development, but few providers are accred- ited. This is partly the result of a lack of knowledge, resources, and incentives for providers to improve quality, but it may also be partly because of expenses providers incur in becoming accredited. Child Care Access As one social determinant of health, access to affordable high-quality child care that supports child development and meets family needs Access to child care goes beyond simple "supply" (numbers of avail- able slots) and "demand" (numbers of young children needing extra- familial care). Barriers to access include aspects of affordability, hours of operation, location, transportation, and culturally or linguistically appropriate care. Barriers to access to high-quality child care are per- vasive among families in which caregivers work irregular, fluctuating, or nontraditional work schedules, families with infants and toddlers, families for whom English is not the primary language spoken at home, and families with children with disabilities or special needs. Two thirds of children 5 years of age and younger have both parents in the workforce or in school or training programs. Nearly 30% of low- income mothers of children under 6 years of age work nonstandard hours, but child care supply during nonstandard or irregular hours is extremely limited. Over 30% of parents with children in weekly care report that the arrangement does not cover the hours needed for work very well. Many more report that they are not in the workforce or school, or not working the hours or shifts that they need or want, due to lack of affordable accessible child care. SCREENING AND SUPPORT FOR CHILD DEVELOPMENT AND HEALTH Child Care and Child Behavior Before the COVID-19 pandemic, about 192,000 U.S. young children were being expelled or suspended from child care programs annually for concerns rising from developmentally typical crying and temper tantrums to physical aggression to violations of various "zero toler- ance policies," such as bringing a water gun to child care. In fact, young children are expelled from child care and preschool programs at a rate more than 3 times that for kindergarten through 12th graders. Young children experiencing any number of adverse childhood events are at significantly increased odds of preschool expulsion, such as exposure to domestic or community violence, family mental illness and substance abuse, poverty, parental divorce, and parental incarceration. These disciplinary exclusions are disproportionately applied to young males and to children of color; implicit biases account for at least some of these disproportionalities. These early disciplinary exclusions predict later negative school attitudes, academic failure and grade retention, and later expulsions and suspensions, as well as a 10-fold increase in high-school dropout rates and an 8-fold increase in later incarceration. 

186 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior State efforts to reduce early childhood exclusionary discipline include early childhood mental health consultation (ECHC) models to support child care providers, who are often not well trained in man- aging child behavior, as well as build capacity to raise child care quality for all children. ECMHC links a mental health professional with an early education and care provider in an ongoing problem-solving and capacity-building relationship. ECMHC has been shown to be effec- tive in statewide randomized controlled trials, and now exist in sev- eral states and cities. Because this is a rapidly evolving area of support, clinicians wishing to provide guidance to parents of young children at risk of early disciplinary exclusion should consider inquiring about the existence of an ECHC system within their state or locality by contacting their state early childhood department and/or state/local child care resource and referral agency. Local regulations may limit or prohibit the exclusion of children in response to behaviors that may be a symptomatic expression of a diagnosed disability or special education need, providing a potential method for safeguarding a child's ability to receive early care and education, as described in the next section. Children with Special Needs Children with cognitive, physical, or emotional disabilities who require special care and instruction often require particular attention when it comes to their participation in most child care settings. Guiding princi- ples of services for children with disabilities advocate supporting chil- dren in natural environments, including child care. Furthermore, the Americans with Disabilities Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibit discrimination against children and adults with disabilities by requiring equal access to offered programs and services. Child care can be, and often is, utilized for delivery of support ser- vices to children with special needs and/or for linking families to ser- vices such as early intervention. Furthermore, clinicians can draw on child care providers for important evaluative data regarding a child's well-being, as these providers have extensive daily contact with the child and may have broad, professional understanding of normative child development. Child care providers often conduct screenings for developmental milestones and delays using standardized instruments. A child care provider may be the first to identify a child's potential language delay. Child care providers are also necessary and valuable partners in the development and administration of early intervention service plans. However, many child care providers and settings are unprepared to identify or administer services for children with special Children with special needs may be eligible for special educational services under IDEA. The purpose of this law is to provide "free appro- priate public education," regardless of disability or chronic illness, to all eligible children, birth to 21 years of age, in a natural and/or least- restrictive environment. Eligible children include those with mental, physical, or emotional disabilities who, because of their disability or chronic illness, require special instruction to learn. As a part of these services, a formal plan of intervention is to be developed by the ser- vice providers, families, and the children's healthcare providers. Fed- eral funds are available to implement a collaborative early intervention system of services for eligible infants and toddlers between the ages of birth and 3 years and their families. These services include screen- ing, assessment, service coordination, and collaborative development of an individualized family service plan (IFSP). The IFSP describes early intervention services for the child's health, therapeutic, and edu- cational needs and supports needed by the family. An understanding of the child's routines and real-life opportunities and activities, such as eating, playing, interacting with others, and working on developmental skills, is crucial to enhancing a child's ability to achieve the functional goals of the IFSP. Therefore it is critical that child care providers be involved in IFSP development or revision, with parental consent. Child care providers should also become familiar with the child's IFSP and understand the providers' role and the resources available to support the family and child care provider. Additionally, IDEA provides sup- port for eligible children 3 years of age and older to receive services through the local school district. This includes development of a writ- ten individualized education program (IEP), with implementation being the responsibility of the local education agency in either a public or private preschool setting. As with IFSPs, child care providers should become familiar with the preschooler's special needs as identified in the IEP and may become involved, with parental consent, in IEP devel- opment and review meetings. In cases where children may have or be at risk of developmental delays, a diagnosis is important for obtaining and coordinating services and further evaluation. To this end, clini- cians can partner with child care providers to screen and monitor chil- dren's behavior and development. Even if a young child is not being provided special educational services, special accommodations may be requested for any child whose access to child care is being adversely impacted by a diagnosable developmental or behavioral disability through Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Sick Children and Control of Infectious Disease When children are ill, they may be excluded from out-of-home child care and under state licensure child care programs are required to exclude children with certain conditions. Children in child care are of an age that places them at increased risk for acquiring infectious diseases. Participation in group settings elevates exposure, leading to increased infections, especially during the first year of child care expo- sure and especially with infants. Children enrolled in such settings have a higher incidence of illness (upper respiratory tract infections, otitis media, diarrhea, hepatitis A infections, skin conditions, and asthma) than those cared for at home, especially in the preschool years; these ill- nesses have no long-term adverse consequences. Child care providers that follow child care licensure guidelines for handwashing, diapering, and food handling, and manage child illness appropriately, can reduce communicable illnesses. CFOC (2019) and its up-to-date online supplement and the AAP (Table 29.2) offer guidelines and recommendations regarding the con- ditions under which sick children should and should not be excluded from group programs. State laws typically mirror these guidelines but may be stricter in some states. Although exclusion from child care due to mild illness is often unnecessary, their summary of guidelines states that a child should be excluded temporarily from care if the signs or symptoms of the illness does any of the following: • Prevents the child from participating in daycare activities • Results in a level of care that is greater than the staff can provide • Poses a contagion risk of serious diseases to other children and staff For COVID-19 exposure or symptoms or recovery go to https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-nCoV/index.html Health checks should be performed on each child every day. If symp- toms develop during child care but do not require exclusion, written or verbal communication after the daycare is appropriate. Emergen- cies must be addressed with 911 calls and immediate notification of the family. If nonemergent but requiring exclusion, the parents should be notified to take the child home. Parents should have a backup plan when exclusions occur. Return to child care is usually permissible with- out a primary healthcare visit. CFOC also provides guidelines for control of infectious disease out- breaks and for exclusion of any child or staff member who is suspected of contributing to transmission of the illness, who is not adequately immunized when there is an outbreak of a vaccine-preventable dis- ease, or when the circulating pathogen poses an increased risk to the During the first 3 months of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, exposure to child care was not associated with an elevated risk of COVID-19 transmission to adult child care providers within the con- text of the considerable eftorts that were employed to reduce transmis- sion. Although enhanced hand hygiene and surface disinfecting were the most common transmission mitigation methods, many child care programs also engaged in daily symptom screening and temperature checks, social distancing efforts, and cohorting (i.e., keeping groups of children separate to help control the speed of transmission). Despite Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidance, mask- ing of adults and children were rarely employed; federal guidance and requirements in several states, child care provider COVID-19 vaccina- tion rates in June 2021 were only 78.2%. COVID-19 modifications and 

Down pid 0, 2024. For persona (ds mi20 trail com at persis of Sor 224 sty Chine Align be elecier on Table 29.2 Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care SIGN OR SYMPTOM Cold symptoms COMMON CAUSES Viruses (early stage of many viruses) • Adenovirus • Coronavirus • Enterovirus • Influenza virus • Parainfluenza virus • Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) • Rhinovirus Bacterial • Mycoplasma • Pertussis Cough (cough • Common cold is a body • Lower respiratory response to infection (e.g., something pneumonia, that is bronchiolitis) irritating • Croup tissues in • Asthma the airway • Sinus infection anywhere • Bronchitis from the • Pertussis nose to the • Noninfectious causes lungs) like allergies Diaper rash • Irritation by rubbing of diaper material against skin wet with urine or stool • Infection with yeast or bacteria Diarrhea • Usually viral, less commonly bacterial or parasitic • Noninfectious causes such as dietary (drinking too much juice), medications, inflammatory bowel disease, or cystic fibrosis COMPLAINTS OR WHAT MIGHT BE SEEN • Coughing • Runny or stuffy nose • Scratchy throat • Sneezing • Fever • Watery eyes NOTIFY HEALTH CONSULTANT Not necessary unless epidemics occur (i.e., RSV or vaccine- preventable disease like measles or varicella [chickenpox]) : Rumor nose lean, white, or yellow-green) • Sore throat • Throat irritation • Hoarse voice, barking cough • Coughing fits Not necessary unless the cough is due to a vaccine- preventable disease, such as pertussis • Redness • Scaling • Red bumps • Sores • Cracking of skin in diaper region Not necessary Yes Yes • Frequent loose or watery stools Yes, if one or more Yes compared with child's normal cases of bloody pattern. (Note that exclusively diarrhea or two breastfed infants normally have or more children frequent unformed and in same group mayhas watra days with no with diarrhea within a week stools.) : Abdominal cramps : Comrial casely present NOTIFY PARENT Yes TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE? No, unless • Fever accompanied by behavior Chid looks or acts very il. Child has difficulty breathing. Child has blood-red or purple rash not associated with injury. • Child meets routine exclusion criteria. No, unless • Severe cough. Rapid or difficult breathing. Wheezing if not already evaluated and treated. • Cyanosis (i.e., blue color of skin or mucous membranes). • Pertussis is diagnosed and not yet treated. • Fever with behavior change. Child meets routine exclusion No onling sores that leak body fluids • Chide the routine exlusion criteria. Yes, if • Directed by the local health department as part of outbreak management. • Stool is not contained in the diaper for diapered children. • Diarrhea is causing "accidents" for toilet-trained children. • Stool frequency exceeds 2 stools above normal during the time the child is in the program because this may cause too much work for teachers/caregivers and make it difficult to maintain good sanitation. : Black tocus in stool. • No urine output in 8 hours. • Jaundice (i.e., yellow skin or eyes). • Fever with behavior change. • Looks or acts very ill. • Child meets routine exclusion criteria. IF EXCLUDED, READMIT WHEN Exclusion criteria are resolved. Exclusion criteria are resolved. Exclusion criteria are resolved. • Cleared to return by healthcare provider for all cases of bloody diarrhea and diarrhea caused by Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli, Shigella, or Salmonella serotype Typhi until negative stool culture requirement has been met. • Diapered children have their stool contained by the diaper (even if the stools remain loose) and toilet-trained children do not have toileting accidents. • Stool frequency is no more than 2 stools above normal during the time the child is in the program, or what has become normal for that child when the child seems otherwise well. • Exclusion criteria are resolved. Continued 187 

Jownloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalK ey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Table 29.2 SIGN OR SYMPTOM Difficult or noisy breathing Earache Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care-cont' d NOTIFY COMPLAINTS OR WHAT HEALTH NOTIFY COMMON CAUSES MIGHT BE SEEN CONSULTANT PARENT • Common cold • Common cold: stuffy/runny Not necessary Yes • Croup nose, sore throat, cough, or except for • Epiglottitis mild fever epiglottitis • Bronchiolitis • Croup: barking cough, • Asthma hoarseness, fever, possible • Pneumonia chest discomfort (symptoms • Object stuck in airway worse at night), or very noisy • Exposed to a known breathing, especially when trigger of asthma breathing in symptoms (e.g., animal • Epiglottitis: gasping noisily for dander, pollen) breath with mouth wide open, chin pulled down, high fever, or bluish (cyanotic) nails and skin; drooling, unwilling to lie down • Bronchiolitis and asthma: child is working hard to breathe; rapid breathing; space between ribs looks like it is sucked in with each breath (retractions); wheezing; whistling sound with breathing; cold/cough; irritable and unwell. Takes longer to breathe out than to breathe in. • Pneumonia: deep cough, fever, rapid breathing, or space between ribs looks like it is sucked in with each breath (retractions) • Object stuck in airway: symptoms similar to croup (listed previously) • Exposed to a known trigger of asthma symptoms: a known trigger and breathing that sounds or looks different from what is normal for that child • Fever : Bre occurs in context: Pan or iritability of common cold virus • Difficulty hearing • "Blocked ears" • Drainage • Swelling around ear Not necessary Yes TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE? Yes, if • Fever with behavior change. : Chid has difreuts breathing. • Rapid or difficult breathing. • Wheezing if not already evaluated and treated. • Cyanosis (i.e., blue color of skin or mucous membranes). • Cough interferes with activities. • Breath sounds can be heard when the child is at rest. • Child has blood-red or purple rash not associated with injury. • Child meets routine exclusion criteria. IF EXCLUDED, READMIT WHEN Exclusion criteria are resolved. No, unless child meets routine exclusion criteria. Exclusion criteria are resolved. 188 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior 

Clinica Table 29.2 Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care-cont'd SIGN OR SYMPTOM oinkeye COMPLAINTS OR WHAT MIGHT COMMON CAUSES BE SEEN Eye irritation, • Bacterial infection of the • Bacterial infection: pink color of membrane covering one the "whites" of eyes and thick or both eyes and eyelids yellow/green discharge. Eyelid (bacterial conjunctivitis) may be irritated, swollen, or • Viral infection of the crusted. membrane covering one • Viral infection: pinkish/red or both eyes color of the whites of the eye; and eyelids (viral irritated, swollen eyelids; watery conjunctivitis) discharge with or without some • Allergic irritation of the crusting around the eyelids; may membrane have associated cold symptoms. covering one or both • Allergic and chemical irritation: eyes and eyelids red, tearing, itchy, puffy eyelids; (allergic runny nose, sneezing; watery/ conjunctivitis) stringy discharge with or • Chemical irritation of without some crusting around the membrane the eyelids. covering the eye and eyelid (irritant conjunctivitis) (e.g., swimming in heavily chlorinated water, air pollution, smoke exposure) NOTIFY HEALTH NOTIFY CONSULTANT PARENT Yes, if two or more Yes children have red eyes with watery discharge Fever • Any viral, bacterial, or parasitic infection : Reaction exercise medication or vaccine • Other noninfectious illnesses (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, malignancy) Flushing, tired, irritable, decreased Not necessary activity Notes: • Fever alone is not harmful. When a child has an infection, raising the body temperature is part of the body's normal defense against germs. • Rapid elevation of body temperature sometimes triggers a febrile seizure in young children; this usually is outgrown by age 6 a hens, the child freiles medical evaluation. These seizures are frightening but are usually brief (less than 15 minutes) and do not cause the child any long-term harm. Parents should inform their child's healthcare provider every time the child has a seizure, even if the child is known to have febrile seizures. Warning: Do not give aspirin. It has been linked to an increased risk of Reye syndrome (a rare and serious disease affecting the brain and liver). Yes TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE? For bacterial conjunctivitis No. Exclusion is no longer required for this condition. Healthcare providers may vary on whether to treat this condition with antibiotic medication. The role of antibiotics in treatment and preventing spread is unclear. Most children with pinkeye get better after 5 or 6 days without antibiotics. For other eye problems No, unless child meets other exclusion criteria. Note: One type of viral conjunctivitis spreads rapidly and requires exclusion. If two or more children in the group have watery red eyes without any known chemical irritant exposure, exclusion may be required and health authorities should be notified to determine whether the situation involves the uncommon epidemic conjunctivitis caused by a specific type of adenovirus. Herpes simplex conjunctivitis (red eyes with blistering/vesicles on eyelid) occurs rarely and would also require exclusion if there is eye watering. No, unless • Behavior change or other signs of illness in addition to fever or child meets other routine exclusion criteria. • Unable to participate. • Care would compromise staff's ability to care for other children. Note: A temperature considered meaningfully elevated above normal, although not necessarily an indication of a significant health problem, for infants and children older than 2 mo is above 101°F (38.3°C) from any site (axillary, oral, or rectal). Get medical attention when infants younger than 4 mo have unexplained fever. In any infant younger than 2 mo, a temperature above 100.4°F (38.0°C) is considered meaningfully, elevated and requires that the child get medical attention immediately, within an hour if possible. The fever is not harmful; however, the illness causing it may be serious in this age group. IF EXCLUDED, READMIT WHEN • For bacterial conjunctivitis, once parent has discussed with healthcare provider. Antibiotics may or may not be prescribed. • Exclusion criteria are resolved. Exclusion criteria are resolved. Chapter 29 • Child Care 189 Continued 

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on April 202 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Table 29.2 Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care-cont'd NOTIFY SIGN OR SYMPTOM Headache COMMON CAUSES • Any bacterial/viral infection • Other noninfectious causes COMPLAINTS OR WHAT MIGHT BE SEEN : Can occur with or without other symptoms HEALTH CONSULTANT Not necessary NOTIFY PARENT Yes Itching : Chickenpox reaction (e.g., poison ivy) • Dry skin or eczema • Impetigo Mouth sores • Oral thrush (yeast infection) • Herpes or coxsackie- virus infection • Canker sores • Ringworm: itchy ring-shaped patches on skin or bald patches on scalp. • Chickenpox: blister-like spots surrounded by red halos on scalp, face, and body; fever; irritable. : Read me: smalichincts or white egg sheaths that look like grains of sand (nits) in hair. • Scabies: severely itchy red bumps on warm areas of body, especially between fingers or toes. • Allergic or irritant reaction: raised, circular, mobile rash; reddening of the skin; blisters occur with local reactions (poison ivy, contact reaction). • Dry skin or eczema: dry areas on body. More often worse on cheeks, in front of elbows, and behind knees. In infants, may be dry areas on face and anywhere on body but not usually in the diaper area. If swollen, red, or oozing, think about infection. • Impetigo: areas of crusted yellow, oozing sores. Often around mouth or nasal openings or areas of broken skin (insect bites, scrapes). • Oral thrush: white patches on tongue, gums, and along inner cheeks • Herpes or coxsackievirus infection: pain on swallowing; fever; painful, white/red spots in mouth; swollen neck glands; inside cheeks or on gums Yes, for infestations such as lice and scabies; if more than one child in group has impetigo or ringworm; for chickenpox Yes TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE? No, unless child meets routine exclusion criteria Note: Notify healthcare provider in case of sudden, severe headache with vomiting or stiff neck that might signal meningitis. It would be concerning if the back of the neck is painful or the child cannot look at his or her belly button (putting chin to chest)— different from soreness in the side of the neck. For chickenpox: Yes, until lesions are fully crusted For ringworm, impetigo, scabies, and head lice: Yes, at the end of the day Children should be referred to a healthcare provider at the end of the day for treatment. For pinworm, allergic or irritant reactions like hives, and eczema: No, unless appears infected as a weeping or crusty sore Note: Although exclusion for these conditions is not necessary, families should seek advice from the child's health professional for how to care for these health problems. For any other itching: No, unless the child meets routine exclusion criteria. Not necessary Yes No, unless • Drooling steadily related to mouth sores. • Fever with behavior change. • Child meets routine exclusion criteria. IF EXCLUDED, READMIT WHEN Exclusion criteria are resolved. • Exclusion criteria are resolved. • On medication or treated as recommended by a healthcare provider if treatment is indicated for the condition. For conditions that require application of antibiotics to lesions or taking antibiotics by mouth, the period of treatment to reduce risk of spread to others is usually 24 hours. For most children with insect infestations or parasites, readmission as soon as the treatment has been given is acceptable. Exclusion criteria are resolved. 190 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior 

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalK ey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved Table 29.2 Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care-cont'd SIGN OR SYMPTOM Rash COMMON CAUSES Many causes • Viral: roseola infantum, fifth disease, chickenpox, herpesvirus, molluscum contagiosum, warts, cold sores, shingles (herpes zoster), and others • Skin infections and infestations: ringworm (fungus), scabies (parasite), impetigo, abscesses, and cellulitis (bacteria) • Scarlet fever (strep infection) • Severe bacterial infections: meningococcus, pneumococcus, Staphylococcus (methicillin-susceptible S. aureus; methicillin-resistant S. aureus), Streptococcus • Noninfectious causes: allergy (hives), eczema, contact (irritant) dermatitis, medication related, poison ivy Sore throat (pharyngitis) • Viral: common cold viruses that cause upper respiratory infections • Strep throat COMPLAINTS OR WHAT MIGHT BE SEEN • Skin may show similar findings with many different causes. Determining cause of rash requires a competent healthcare provider evaluation that takes into account information other than just how rash looks. However, if the child appears well other than the rash, a healthcare provider visit is not necessary. • Viral: usually signs of general illness such as runny nose, cough, and fever (except not for warts or molluscum). Some viral rashes have a distinctive appearance. • Minor skin infections and infestations: see Itching. • More serious skin infections: redness, pain, fever, pus. • Severe bacterial infections: rare. These children usually have fever with a rapidly spreading blood-red rash and may be very ill. • Allergy may be associated with a raised, itchy, pink rash with bumps that can be as small as a pinpoint or large welts known as hives. See also Itching for what might be seen for allergy or contact (irritant) dermatitis or eczema. • Viral: verbal children will complain of sore throat; younger children may be irritable with decreased appetite and increased drooling (refusal to swallow). Often see symptoms associated with upper respiratory illness, such as runny nose, cough, and congestion. • Strep throat: signs of the body's fight against infection include red tissue with white patches on sides of throat, at back of tongue (tonsil area), and at back wall of throat. Unlike viral pharyngitis, strep throat infections are not accompanied with cough or runny nose in children older than 3 yr. • Tonsils may be large, even touching each other. Swollen lymph nodes (sometimes called swollen glands") occur as body fights off the infection. NOTIFY HEALTH CONSULTANT For outbreaks, such as multiple children with impetigo within a group NOTIFY PARENT Yes Not necessary Yes TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE? No, unless • Rash with behavior change or fever. : Has bruising not associated with injury. • Has joint pain and rash. • Rapidly spreading blood-red rash. • Tender, red area of skin, especially if it is increasing in size or tenderness. • Child meets routine exclusion criteria. • Diagnosed with a vaccine- preventable condition, such as chickenpox. No, unless • Inability to swallow. • Excessive drooling with breathing difficulty. : Child meets routine exclusion criteria. Note: Most children with red back of throat or tonsils, pus on tonsils, or swollen lymph nodes have viral nfections. If strep is present, 12 hours of antibiotics is required before return to care. However, tests for strep infection are not often necessary for children younger than 3 yr because these children do not develop rheumatic heart disease, which is the primary reason for treatment of strep throat. IF EXCLUDED, READMIT WHEN • On antibiotic medication for required period (if indicated). • Infestations (lice and scabies) and ringworm can be treated at the end of the day with immediate return the following day. • Exclusion criteria are resolved. • Able to swallow. • On medication at least 12 hours (if strep). • Exclusion criteria are resolved. Chapter 29 • Child Care 191 Continued 

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalK ey.com by Elsevier on April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved Table 29.2 SIGN OR SYMPTOM Stomachache Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care-cont'd NOTIFY HEALTH CONSULTANT If multiple cases NOTIFY PARENT Yes in same group within 1 week Swollen glands properly called swollen lymph nodes) COMMON CAUSES • Viral gastroenteritis or strep throat • Problems with internal organs of the abdomen such as intestine, colon, liver, bladder • Nonspecific, behavioral, and dietary causes • If combined with hives, may be associated with a severe allergic reaction • Normal body defense response to viral or bacterial infection in the area where lymph nodes are located (i.e., in the neck for any upper respiratory intectioni • Bacterial infection of lymph nodes that is more than the normal response to infection near where the lymph nodes are located COMPLAINTS OR WHAT MIGHT BE SEEN • Viral gastroenteritis or strep throat: Vomiting and diarrhea or cramping are signs of a viral infection of the stomach or intestine. Strep throat may cause stomachache with sore throat, headache, and possible fever. In children older than 3 yr, if cough or runny nose is present, strep is very unlikely. • Problems with internal organs of the abdomen: persistent severe pain in abdomen. • Nonspecific stomachache: vague complaints without vomiting/diarrhea or much change in activity. • Normal lymph node response: Not necessary swelling at front, sides, and back of the neck and ear; in the armpit or groin; or anywhere else near an area of an infection. Usually, these nodes are less than 1 inch across. • Bacterial infection of lymph nodes: swollen, warm lymph nodes with overlying pink skin, tender to the touch, usually located near an area of the body that has been infected Usually these nodes are larger than 1 inch across. Diarrhea, vomiting, or cramping for For outbreak viral gastroenteritis Yes TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE? No, unless • Severe pain causing child to double over or scream. • Abdominal pain after injury. Bloody/black stools. • No urine output for 8 hours. • Diarrhea (see Diarrhea). • Vomiting (see Vomiting). • Yellow skin/eyes. • Fever with behavior change. • Looks or acts very ill. • Child meets routine exclusion criteria. No, unless Red, tender, warm glands. Fever with behavior change. Child meets routine exclusion criteria. Vomiting • Viral infection of the Yes stomach or intestine (gastroenteritis) : Coughvira stines with fever • Noninfectious causes: food allergy (vomiting, sometimes with hives), trauma, dietary and medication related, Yes, if • Vomited more than 2 times in 24 hours • Vomiting and fever • Vomiting with hives • Vomit that appears green/bloody • No urine output in 8 hours • Recent history of head injury • Looks or acts very ill • Child meets routine exclusion criteria. headache From Aronson SS, Shope TR, (eds). Managing Infectious Diseases in Child Care and Schools: a quick reference guide. 4th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017. IF EXCLUDED, READMIT WHEN Pain resolves. : Able to participate, Exclusion criteria are resolved. • Child is on antibiotics (if indicated). • Exclusion criteria are resolved. 192 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior 

considerations are itemized in the Crosswalk (https://nrckids.org/files /CFOC.Crosswalk.pdf) and include, for example, discussion of daily symptom checks for children as well as daily screening procedures and exclusion criteria for staff. Most families need to arrange to keep sick children at home neces- sitating staying home from work or having backup plans with an alter- native caregiver. Alternative care arrangements outside the home for sick children are relatively rare but may include either (1) care in the child's own center, if it offers special provisions designed for the care of ill children (sometimes called the infirmary model or sick daycare), or (2) care in a center that serves only children with illness or temporary conditions. Although it is important that such arrangements empha- size preventing further spread of disease, one study found no occur- rence of additional transmission of communicable disease in children attending a sick center. Protection and Promotion of Child Health Child care has a role in protecting and promoting child health and well-being. Child care providers are often the first to notice signs of child abuse and neglect and are a major source of child welfare refer- rals. Findings of increased health-related issues in the first year of child care are likely a testament to early detection benefits provided by child care providers. Sudden Infant Death Syndrome A disproportionate number of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) deaths occur in child care centers or family-based child care homes. Infants who are back-sleepers at home but are put to sleep on their front in child care settings have a higher risk of SIDS. Providers and parents should be made aware of the importance of placing infants on their backs to sleep. Asthma and Respiratory Illness Children enrolled in prekindergarten may have a greater risk of asthma diagnosis during prekindergarten but a lower risk in the years following prekindergarten, when compared with children who were not exposed to prekindergarten. Enrollment in prekindergarten may increase the early detection of asthma symptoms. A 10-year follow-up of a birth cohort has found no association between child care attendance and respiratory infections, asthma, allergic rhinitis, or skin-prick test reactivity. Another study found that in the first year of elementary school, children who had attended child care had fewer absences from school, half as many episodes of asthma, and less acute respiratory illness than their peers who had never attended child care. These results are perhaps related to protec- tion against respiratory illness through early exposure or a shift in the age-related peak of illness, although selection of illness-prone chil- dren into homecare may play a role. Other factors include children in child care potentially being less exposed to passive smoking than children at home. Vision and Hearing Problems Children enrolled in a citywide universal prekindergarten program had higher probability of diagnosis of vision problems, receipt of treat- suggesting that identification and treatment of these conditions was accelerated by enrollment in universal prekindergarten. As hearing and vision problems could potentially delay learning and cause behav- joral problems, early detection and treatment is beneficial for future health and school readiness. Obesity and Promotion of Healthy Behaviors There is insufficient research on longitudinal associations between child care, diet, and physical activity behaviors. Some limited research sug- gests a negative or mixed association between child care exposure and healthy behaviors, but the strength of these associations, and whether any causal implications exist, are difhcult to tease apart. Other research suggests that child care center-based interventions are generally found Chapter 29 • Child Care 193 to be effective in improving physical activity and may be effective at improving dietary behaviors. The CDC identifies child care settings as one of the best places to reach young children with obesity prevention efforts. Through their Spectrum of Opportunities framework (https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/ strategies/childcareece.html), they outline how a state's early care and education system can embed recommended standards and support for obesity prevention, including nutrition, infant feeding, physical activ- ity, and screen time. ROLE OF PEDIATRIC PROVIDERS Consultation, Referrals, and Screening to Improve Access Many parents are first-time purchasers of child care with little experi- ence and very immediate needs; they may select care in a market that does little to provide them with useful information about child care arrangements. To inform their child care decisions, parents may turn to their child's healthcare provider as the only professional with exper- tise in child development with whom they have regular and convenient contact. Primary care clinicians should screen for child care just as they do for other social determinants of health, asking about child care arrangements and offering information about resources to help find and pay for child care to reinforce the importance of child care and increase the chances that children are enrolled in high-quality settings. It is difficult for many parents to find high-quality child care that they can accept and afford. Many parents also worry how their child will fare in child care (e.g., they may worry that their child will feel dis- tressed by the group settings, suffer from separation from the parents, or even be subjected to neglect or abuse). Practical concerns of trans- portation, scheduling to cover their work or school hours, and reliabil- ity are also common. The reliability of the arrangement is often rated as a "very important" selection factor by a higher proportion of parents than any other factor, followed by availability and staff qualifications. Among those who reported difficulty finding child care, cost was most often the primary reason, followed by lack of open slots, quality, then location or other reasons. Worries about finding quality child care are especially likely among parents with greater barriers to child care access and fewer personally accessible family and community resources. With the coronavirus pandemic, parents may be worried about the transmis- sion of COVID-19 and about sporadic disruptions in service caused by quarantines or temporary closures, and unfounded fears about the safety of vaccines or facial masks. Primary care practices can share information with parents about publicly available sources of information to help them find or pay for child care (Table 29.3). For example, they can • Refer low-income parents to Head Start, which serves 3-4 year old children, or Early Head Start programs, which serves low-income expecting families and their children until their child's third birth- day • Refer low-income working parents to apply for child care subsidies and financial assistance in their state or county • Refer parents to their local child care resource and referral agency for help finding and selecting child care; these can be located via the national association, Child Care Aware of America (www.childcarea ware.org/families) Some parents may think of child care only as babysitting focusing mainly on whether the child is safe and warm and may not fully appreci- ate the potential consequences of unenriched care for their child's cogni- tive, linguistic, and social development. These parents may be less likely to select a high-quality child care arrangement. Healthcare providers can help parents understand the importance for their child's development of selecting high-quality care by describing how it looks and providing referrals and tips on how to find and select high-quality child care. Fami- lies facing socioeconomic challenges accessing high-quality care should be referred to available resources listed previously and in Table 29.3. When a healthcare provider talks with a parent about a child care arrangement, it also is important to consider the individual child's health concerns, dispositions, and physiologic responses to the envi- ronment. Like all environments, child care is experienced differently 

194 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 29.3 Child Care Information Resources ORGANIZATION All Our Kin Caring for Our Children: National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care and Early Education (NRC) Child Care Aware of America Healthy Child Care America HealthySteps National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) National Association for Family Child Care National Black Child Development Institute National Database of Child Care Licensing Regulations SPONSOR American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Public Health Association, and the National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care and Early Education American Academy of Pediatrics Zero to Three National Center on Early Childhood Quality Assurance (NCECOA) funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families. WEBSITE AND CONTACT INFORMATION https://allourkin.org/ Caring for Our Children, National Health and Safety Performance Standards https://nrckid s.org/CFOC http://www.childcareaware.org http://www.healthychildcare.org https://www.healthysteps.org/ http://www.naeyc.org https://nafcc.org/ https://www.nbcdi.org/ https://childcareta.acf.hhs.gov/licensing National Indian Child Care Association Office of Child Care (OCC) https://www.nicca.us/ http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/occ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children & Families U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children & Families, Office of Child Care Office of Child Care Technical Assistance Network (CCTAN) UnidosUS Zero to Three by different children. When an environment lacks adequate support for a child's unique needs, healthy development can be compromised. Some children may be more vulnerable to low-quality child care (or particularly responsive to high-quality child care), such as children with difficult or fearful temperaments, especially if their home environ- ments are characterized by more risk factors, such as poverty or high conflict with a parent. Clinicians can help parents determine how to adjust child care arrangements to best meet their child's specific needs (e.g., allergies, eating and sleeping habits, temperament, and stress- regulation capacities). Children Who Are Expelled from Child Care A provider may tell a parent that they will not continue to serve a child because of the child's behaviors. Such expulsions are prohibited in some regulated child care settings, such as Head Start and many state-funded prekindergarten programs. In addition to complete ter- mination of a child's child care arrangement (expulsion), children are sometimes told that they cannot attend for a certain number of days (suspension) or have their hours of care reduced, sent home from care early, or excluded in other ways. Regardless of the form of the exclusion or its stated reason, the result is often extremely stressful for the child and family, and often the child care provider too. Indeed, parents may lose their jobs due to the resulting lack of reliable child care or resort to dangerous alternatives, such as leaving the child unattended or in an unsafe arrangement. Healthcare providers should play an impor- tant role during child care expulsions by supporting families' efforts to find alternative care, perhaps through a referral to their local child care resource and referral agency, assessing for any potentially contributory underlying developmental or behavioral concerns, and asking parents about the safety of any alternative care arrangements. (See Standard 2.2.0.8 [Preventing Expulsions, Suspensions, and Other Limitations in Services] of Caring for Our Children, as well as the most recent policy statement on this issue by the AAP.) https://childcareta.acf.hhs.gov/ https://www.unidosus.org/ https://www.zerotothree.org/ Supporting Parents Regarding Children's Health Parents frequently may ask primary care clinicians about sick children, exposure to and prevention of risks in child care, and support for chil- dren with special needs in child care. When children are ill, parents should be advised to follow guidelines for inclusion and temporary exclusion (see CFOF, CDC, and state guidelines) (see Table 29.2). Par- ents may disagree with child care staff about whether a child meets or does not meet the exclusion criteria, as a substantial amount of work absenteeism is due to a child illness, showing the impact of lost child care on parental employment. However, professional guidelines in CFOC state that if the reason for exclusion relates to the child's abil- ity to participate or the caregiver's ability to provide care for the other children, the caregiver should not be required to accept responsibility for the care of the child. Primary care clinicians should emphasize that parents of infants ensure that child care providers put infants on their backs to sleep to prevent SIDS and follow vaccination schedules, including COVID-19 vaccination as it is available to children of younger ages. Most states require compliance with scheduled vaccinations for children to par- ticipate in licensed group child care settings. As of October 2021, only three states (Connecticut, Illinois, New Jersey, and Washington) plus the District of Columbia required child care providers to be vaccinated against COVID-19 and/or participate in regular testing. Helping Families of Children with Special Needs Healthcare providers should work with parents and communicate with other service providers and early intervention staff to identity prob- lems, remove access barriers, and coordinate service delivery for chil- dren with special needs. They should also encourage involvement of parents and child care providers in developing special education plans such as IEPs and IFSPs. Federal law emphasizes the central role of the family in the development of these plans, and the team writing this plan must consist of the parent or legal guardian and other professionals 

that may be involved in the provision of these services, including child care providers. Healthcare providers have an important role to play on these IFSP teams and may attend meetings at the request of the family. Many children with developmental or other special needs that would qualify them for early childhood special education services will present with health concerns, making the healthcare professionals an essen- tial part of adequate early education planning. Additionally, healthcare professionals may support a child's civil rights to access public services such as preschool when their access or ability to participate fully in the program are at risk of limitation due to a diagnosable disability, health, or mental health condition. Often this may require writing a letter stat- ing the nature of the medical condition and the types of accommoda- tions that may improve the child's ability to participate more fully in the range of activities offered by the program. By supporting a child's civil rights under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, clinicians can and should play an integral role for safeguarding the rights of their patients. Consulting and Partnering with Child Care Providers Most state regulations mandate that licensed programs have a formal relationship with a healthcare provider. They can provide consultation to child care providers about measures to protect and maintain the health and safety of children and staff. This may include consultation regarding promoting practices to prevent SIDS; preventing and reduc- ing the spread of communicable disease; reducing allergen, toxin, and parasite exposure; ensuring vaccinations for children and staff; remov- ing environmental hazards; and preventing injuries. In some cases pediatricians have provided ongoing health and mental health consul- tation to child care programs, such through highly successful programs like HealthySteps (https://www.healthysteps.org/) and "Docs for Tots" (https://docsfortots.org/). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 30 Loss, Separation, and Bereavement Megan E. McCabe and Janet R. Serwint All children will experience involuntary separations, whether from illness, death, or other causes, from loved ones at some time in their lives. Relatively brief separations of children from their parents usually produce minor transient effects, but more enduring and frequent sepa- ration may cause sequelae. The potential impact of each event must be considered in light of the age, stage of development, and experiences of the child; the particular relationship with the absent person; and the nature of the situation. SEPARATION AND LOSS Separations may be from temporary causes, such as vacations, parental job requirements, natural disasters or civil unrest, or parental or sibling illness requiring hospitalization. More long-term separations occur as a result of divorce, placement in foster care, or immigration, whereas permanent separation may occur because of death. The initial reac- i can he hat rac tion of young children to separation of any duration may involve cry- ing, such as a tantrum type, protesting type, and a quieter, sadder type. Children's behavior may appear subdued, withdrawn, fussy, or moody, or they may demonstrate resistance to authority. Specific problems may Chapter 30 • Loss, Separation, and Bereavement 195 include poor appetite, behavior issues such as acting against caregiver requests, reluctance to go to bed, sleep problems, or regressive behav- ior, such as requesting a bottle or bed-wetting. School-age children may experience impaired cognitive functioning and poor performance in school. Some children may repeatedly ask for the absent parent and question when the absent parent will return. The child may go to the window or door or out into the neighborhood to look for the absent parent; a few may even leave home or their place of temporary place- ment to search for their parents. Other children may not refer to the parental absence at all. A child's response to reunion may surprise or alarm an unprepared parent. A parent who joyfully returns to the family may be met by wary or cautious children. After a brief interchange of affection, children may seem indifferent to the parent's return. This response may indicate anger at being left or wariness that the event will happen again, or the young child may feel, as a result of magical thinking (see Chapter 25), as if the child caused the parent's departure. For example, if the parent who frequently says "Stop it, or you'll give me a headache" is hospital- ized, the child may feel at fault and guilty. Because of these feelings, children may seem more closely attached to the present parent than to the absent one, or even to the grandparent or babysitter who cared for them during their parents absence. Some children, particularly younger ones, may become more clinging and dependent than they were before the separation, while continuing any regressive behavior that occurred during the separation. Such behavior may engage the returned parent more closely and help to reestablish the bond that the child felt was broken. Such reactions are usually transient, and within 1-2 weeks, children will have recovered their usual behavior and equi- librium. Recurrent separations may tend to make children wary and guarded about reestablishing the relationship with the repeatedly absent parent, and these traits may affect other personal relationships. Parents should be advised not to try to modify a child's behavior by threatening to leave. More sustained experiences of loss, such as divorce or placement in foster care, can give rise to the same kinds of reactions noted earlier, but they are more intense and possibly more lasting. Currently in the United States, approximately 40% of first marriages end in divorce. Divorce has been found to be associated with negative parent function- ing, such as parental depression and feelings of incompetence; nega- tive child behavior, such as noncompliance and whining; and negative parent-child interaction, such as inconsistent discipline, decreased communication, and decreased affection. Greater childhood distress is associated with greater parental distress. Continued parental conflict and loss of contact with the noncustodial parent is common. Two of the most important factors that contribute to morbidity of the children in a divorce include parental psychopathology and disrupted parenting before the separation. The year after the divorce is the period when problems are most apparent; these problems tend to dissipate over the next 2 years. Depression may be present up to 5 years later, and educational or occupational decline may occur even 10 years later. It is difficult to sort out all confounding factors. Children may suffer when exposed to parental conflict that continues after divorce and that in some cases may escalate. The degree of interparental conflict may be the most important factor associated with child morbidity. A contin- ued relationship with the noncustodial parent when there is minimal interparental conflict is associated with more positive outcomes. School-age children may become depressed, may seem indifferent, or may be extremely angry. Other children appear to deny or avoid the issue, behaviorally or verbally. Most children cling to the hope that the actual placement or separation is not real and only temporary. The child may experience guilt by feeling that the loss, separation, or place- ment represents rejection and perhaps punishment for misbehavior. Children may protect a parent and assume guilt, believing that their own "badness" caused the parent to depart. Children who feel that their misbehavior caused their parents to separate may have the fantasy that their own trivial or recurrent behavioral patterns caused their parents to become angry at each other. A child might perceive that outwardly 

196 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior blaming parents is emotionally risky; parents who discover that a child harbors resentment might punish the child further for these thoughts or feelings. Some children have behavioral or psychosomatic symp- toms and unwittingly adopt a "sick" role as a strategy they hope will reunite their parents. In response to divorce of parents and the subsequent separation and loss, older children and adolescents usually show intense anger. Five years after the breakup, approximately 30% of children report intense unhappiness and dissatisfaction with their life and their reconfigured family; another 30% show clear evidence of a satisfactory adjustment; and the remaining children demonstrate a mixed picture, with good achievement in some areas and faltering achievement in others. After 10 years, approximately 45% do well, but 40% may have academic, social, or emotional problems. As adults, some are reluctant to form intimate relationships, fearful of repeating their parents' experience. Parental divorce has a moderate long-term negative impact on the adult mental health status of children, even after controlling for changes in economic status and problems before divorce. Good adjustment of children after a divorce is related to ongoing involvement with two psy- chologically healthy parents who minimize conflict and to the siblings and other relatives who provide a positive support system. Divorcing parents should be encouraged to avoid adversarial processes and to use a trained mediator to resolve disputes if needed. Joint-custody arrange- ments may reduce ongoing parental conflict, but children in joint cus- tody may feel overburdened by the demands of maintaining a strong presence in two homes. When the primary care provider is asked about the effects of divorce, parents should be informed that different children may have different reactions, but that the parents behavior and the way they interact will have a major and long-term effect on the child's adjustment. The con- tinued presence of both parents in the child's life, with minimal inter- parental conflict, is most beneficial to the child. MOVE/FAMILY RELOCATION A significant proportion of the U.S. population changes residence each year. The effects of this movement on children and families are frequently overlooked. For children, the move is essentially involun- tary and out of their control. When changes in family structure such as divorce or death precipitate moves, children face the stresses cre- ated by both the precipitating events and the move itself. Parental sad- ness surrounding the move may transmit unhappiness to the children. Children who move lose their old friends, the comfort of a familiar bedroom and house, and their ties to school and community. They not only must sever old relationships but also are faced with develop- ing new ones in new neighborhoods and new schools. Children may enter neighborhoods with different customs and values, and because academic standards and curricula vary among communities, children who have performed well in one school may find themselves struggling in a new one. Frequent moves during the school years are likely to have adverse consequences on social and academic performance. Migrant children and children who emigrate from other countries present with special circumstances. These children not only need to adjust to a new house, school, and community, but also need to adjust to a new culture and in many cases a new language. Because chil- dren have faster language acquisition than adults, they may function as translators for the adults in their families. This powerful position may lead to role reversal and potential conflict within the family. In the evaluation of migrant children and families, it is important to ask about the circumstances of the migration, including legal status, violence or threat of violence, conflict of loyalties, and moral, ethical, and religious Parents should prepare children well in advance of any move and allow them to express any unhappy feelings or misgivings. Parents should acknowledge their own mixed feelings and agree that they will miss their old home while looking forward to a new one. Visits to the new home in advance are often useful preludes to the actual move. Transient periods of regressive behavior may be noted in pre- school children after moving, and these should be understood and accepted. Parents should assist the entry of their children into the new community, and whenever possible, exchanges of letters and visits with old friends should be encouraged. SEPARATION BECAUSE OF HOSPITALIZATION Potential challenges for hospitalized children include coping with sepa- ration; adapting to the new hospital environment; adjusting to multiple caregivers; seeing very sick children; and sometimes experiencing the disorientation of intensive care, anesthesia, and surgery. To help miti- gate potential problems, a preadmission visit to the hospital can help by allowing the child to meet the people who will be offering care and ask questions about what will happen. Parents of children <5-6 years old should room with the child if feasible. Older children may also ben- efit from parents or other family members staying with them while in the hospital, depending on the severity of their illness. Creative and active recreational or socialization programs with child life specialists, chances to act out feared procedures in play with dolls or mannequins, and liberal visiting hours, including visits from siblings, are all help- ful. Sensitive, sympathetic, and accepting attitudes toward children and parents by the hospital staff are very important. Healthcare providers need to remember that parents have the best interest of their children at heart and know their children the best. Whenever possible, school assignments and tutoring for hospitalized children should be available to engage them intellectually and prevent them from falling behind in their scholastic achievements. The psychologic aspects of illness should be evaluated from the out- set, and physicians should act as a model for parents and children by showing interest in a child's feelings, allowing them a venue for expres- sion, and demonstrating that it is possible and appropriate to com- municate about discomfort. Continuity of medical personnel may be reassuring to the child and family. MILITARY FAMILIES More than 2 million children live in military families in the United States, and approximately 50% of them obtain medical care in the com- munity rather than at a military medical facility. Children whose par- ents are serving in the military may experience loss and separation in multiple ways. These include frequent relocations, relocation to foreign countries, and duty-related separation from parents. The most impact- ful experiences have been repeated wartime deployments of parents and the death of parents during military service. All branches of the military have increased their focus on preparing and supporting mili- tary families for a service member's deployment to improve family cop- ing. Military families composed of young parents and young children are at risk for child maltreatment in the context of repeated or pro- longed deployments. PARENTAL/SIBLING DEATH Approximately 5-8% of U.S. children will experience parental death; rates are much higher in parts of the world more directly affected by war, AIDS, and natural disasters. Anticipated deaths from chronic ill- ness may place a significant strain on a family, with frequent bouts of illness, hospitalization, disruption of normal home life, absence of the ill parent, and perhaps more responsibilities placed on the child. Addi- tional strains include changes in daily routines, financial pressures, and the need to cope with aggressive treatment options. Children can and should continue to be involved with the sick par- ent or sibling, but they need to be prepared for what they will see in the home or hospital setting. The stresses that a child will face include visu- alizing the physical deterioration of the family member, helplessness, and emotional lability. Forewarning the child that the family member may demonstrate physical changes, such as appearing thinner or los- ing hair, will help the child to adjust. These warnings combined with simple yet specific explanations of the need for equipment, such as a nasogastric tube for nutrition, an oxygen mask, or a ventilator, will help lessen the child's fear. Children should be honestly informed of what is happening, in language they can understand, allowing them choices, but with parental involvement in decision-making. They should be encouraged, but not forced, to see their ill family member. Parents who are caring for a dying spouse or child may be too emotionally depleted 

to be able to tend to their healthy child's needs or to continue regular routines. Children of a dying parent may suffer the loss of security and belief in the world as a safe place, and the surviving parent may be inclined to impose his or her own need for support and comfort onto the child. However, the well parent and caring relatives must keep in mind that children need to be allowed to remain children, with appro- priate support and attention. Sudden, unexpected deaths lead to more anxiety and fear because there is no time for preparation, and expla- nations for the death can cause uncertainty. Examples of this may be death of a parent due to a motor vehicle crash, homicide or suicide, sudden health-related issue such as a myocardial infarction or stroke, or from infection such as the recent COVID pandemic. Providing sup- port to the child is paramount to allow him or her to express sorrow and grief and to have stability in the child's remaining relationships. GRIEF AND BEREAVEMENT Grief is a personal, emotional state of bereavement or an anticipated response to loss, such as a death. Common reactions include sadness. anger, guilt, fear, and at times, relief. The normality of these reactions needs to be emphasized. Most bereaved families remain socially con- nected and expect that life will return to some new, albeit different, sense of normalcy. The pain and suffering imposed by grief should never be automatically deemed "normal" ignored. In uncomplicated grief reactions, the steadfast concern of the pediatrician can help promote the family's sense of well-being. In more distressing reactions, as seen in traumatic grief of sudden death, the pediatrician may be a major, first-line force in helping children and families address their loss. Participation in the care of a child with a life-threatening or terminal illness is a profound experience. Parents experience much anxiety and worry during the final stages of their child's life. In one study, 45% of children dying from cancer died in the pediatric intensive care unit, and parents report that 89% of their children suffered "a lot" or "a great deal" during the last month of life. Physicians consistently underreport children's symptoms compared with parents' reports. Better ways are needed to provide care for dying children. Providers need to maintain honest and open communication, provide appropriate pain manage- ment, and meet the families' wishes as to the preferred location of the child's death, in some cases in their own home. Inclusion of multiple disciplines, such as hospice, clergy, nursing, pain service, child life spe- cialists, social work, and pet therapy, often helps to support patients and families fully during this difficult experience. The practice of withholding information from children and parents regarding a child's diagnosis and prognosis has generally been aban- doned, because physicians have learned that protecting parents and patients from the seriousness of their child's condition does not allevi- ate concerns and anxieties. Even very young children may have a real understanding of their illness. Children who have serious diseases and are undergoing aggressive treatment and medication regimens, but who are told by their parents that they are okay, are not reassured. These children understand that something serious is happening to them, and they are often forced to suffer in silence and isolation because the mes- sage they have been given by their parents is to not discuss it and to maintain a cheerful demeanor. Children have the right to know their diagnosis and should be informed early in their treatment. The content and depth of the discussion needs to be tailored to the child's personal- ity and developmental level of understanding. Parents have choices as to how to orchestrate the disclosure. Parents may want to be the ones to inform the child themselves, may choose for the pediatric healthcare provider to do so, or may do it in partnership with the pediatrician. A death, especially the death of a family member, is the most dif- ficult loss for a child. Many changes in normal patterns of functioning may occur, including loss of love and support from the deceased family member, a change in income, the possible need to relocate, less emo- tional support from surviving family members, altering of routines, and a possible change in status from sibling to only child. Relationships between family members may become strained, and children may blame themselves or other family members for the death of a parent or sibling. Bereaved children may exhibit many of the emotions discussed Chapter 30 • Loss, Separation, and Bereavement 197 Table 30.1 Example Items from the Three Grief Measurement Tools Assessed Through Cognitive Interviewing CORE BEREAVEMENT ITEMS (CBI) Do you experience images of the events surrounding your loved one's death? Do thoughts of your loved one make you feel distressed? Do you find yourself pining for/yearning for your loved one? Do reminders of your loved one such as photos, situations, music, places, etc., cause you to feel loneliness? Do reminders of your loved one such as photos, situations, music, places, etc. cause you to cry about your loved one? Response options: A lot of the time; Quite a bit of the time; A little bit of the time; Never GRIEF COGNITIONS QUESTIONNAIRE FOR CHILDREN (GCQ-C) Since my loved one died, I think of myself as a weak person. I should have seen to it that he/she would not have died. I blame myself for not having cared for him/her better than I did. It is not nice toward him/her, when I will begin to feel less sad. My life is worthless since he/she died. Response options: Hardly ever; Sometimes; Always INTRUSIVE GRIEF THOUGHTS SCALE (IGTS) (During the past 4 wk) How often did you think about the death of your loved one? How often did you find yourself thinking how unfair it is that your loved one died, even though you didn't want to think about it? How often did you have trouble falling asleep because you were thinking about your loved one's death? How often have you had bad dreams related to your loved one's death? How often did you have trouble doing things you like because you were worrying about how you and your family will get along? Response options: Several times a day; About once a day; Once or twice a week; Less than once a week; Not at all From Taylor TM, Thurman TR, Nogela L. Every time that month comes, I remember: using cognitive interviews to adapt grief measures for use with bereaved adolescents in South Africa. J Child Adolesc Mental Health. 2016;28(2):163-174, Table 1, p 166. earlier as a result of the loss, in addition to behaviors of withdrawal into their own world, sleep disturbances, nightmares, and symptoms such as headache, abdominal pains, or possibly symptoms similar to those of the family member who has died. Children 3-5 years of age who have experienced a family bereavement may show regressive behaviors such as bed-wetting and thumb sucking. School-age children may exhibit nonspecific symptoms, such as headache, abdominal pain, chest pain, fatigue, and lack of energy. Children and adolescents may also dem- onstrate enhanced anxiety if these symptoms resemble those of the family member who died. Bereavement may be measured by various published scales (Table 30.1). Behavioral patterns of persistent complex bereavement disorder are noted in Table 30.2. The presence of secure and stable adults who can meet the child's needs and who permit discussion about the loss is most important in helping a child to grieve. The pediatrician should help the fam- ily understand this necessary presence and encourage the protective functioning of the family unit (Table 30.3). More frequent visits to the healthcare professional may be necessary to address these symptoms and provide reassurance when appropriate. Suggested availability of clergy or mental health providers can provide additional support and strategies to facilitate the transitions after the death. Death, separation, and loss as a result of natural catastrophes and human-made disasters have become increasingly common events in chil- dren's lives. Exposure to such disasters occurs either directly or indirectly, where the event is experienced through the media. Examples of indirect exposure include scenes of earthquakes, hurricanes, tsunamis, tornadoes. and terrorist attacks. Children who experience personal loss in disasters tend to watch more media coverage than children who do not. Children without a personal loss watch as a way of participating in the event and may thus experience repetitive exposure to traumatic scenes and stories. The loss and devastation for a child who personally lives through a disas- ter are significant; the effect of the simultaneous occurrence of disaster 

198 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 30.2 Developmental Manifestations of Persistent Complex Bereavement Disorder in Children and Adolescents: Developmental Considerations and Symptom Manifestation in Youth CHILD HAS EXPERIENCED THE DEATH OF A LOVED ONE CRITERION A CRITERION B B1: Expression of persistent yearning or Children have an evolving understanding of the permanence of death, particularly among young longing for the deceased children; behavioral expressions of separation distress from surviving caregivers are common, as are reunification fantasies (i.e., wanting to die to be reunited with the parent in the afterlife) B2: Intense sorrow or emotional pain Children focus on the more salient immediate physical environment rather than their own internal state; young children often have difficulties expressing inner mood; overt expressions of emotional pain might be interspersed within seemingly normal mood, which can lead to others incorrectly assuming they are not grieving B3: Preoccupation with the person who Children might become distressed when separated from the deceased parent's belongings; it is died common for youth to seek out physical connections to their parent, including sleeping in the parent's bed, or wearing their clothing or jewelry B4: Preoccupation with the circumstances of the death Young children might reenact the death through play, sometimes with alternate (i.e., counterfactual) actions that depict what children feel they or others could have done to prevent the death; reenacting might also take the form of drawing disturbing scenes or aspects of the death CRITERION C C3: Difficulties related to positive reminiscing about the deceased C4: Bitterness or anger related to the loss Children's ability to reminisce matures with development and is often facilitated by surviving caregivers Youth might show overall irritability, oppositional behavior, and problem behavior in the context of bereavement; externalizing behaviors are often precipitated by changes to the youth's daily routine that are a result of the parent's absence (including others assuming the deceased parent's roles) C5: Maladaptive self-appraisals in relation to the deceased or the death Youth, particularly adolescents, might become preoccupied by a perceived accountability (e.g., blaming others or oneself for their parent's death); in young children, this might manifest as magical thinking that their own thoughts or actions caused their parents to die C6: Excessive avoidance of reminders of the loss C7: Desire not to live so that they can be with the deceased Avoidance might not always be under a child's control (e.g., a parent might choose not to bring the child to the gravesite, which prevents the child from confronting that reminder) Children and adolescents often experience suicidal ideation as a means of reunification fantasies, and their reduced understanding of the complexities of death might exacerbate this mindset among young children; suicidal ideation associated with reunification fantasies might not be accompanied by intent or planning; adolescents might engage in risk-taking behaviors (e.g., substance use, reckless driving) C8: Difficulty trusting other people since the death Children might have difficulty establishing relationships with new caregivers, which is often reflective of difficulty with new life circumstances, rather than lack of trust; youth might also display overt anger or oppositional and defiant behaviors toward the surviving or new caregiver C9: Feeling alone or detached from others since the death Youth often report feelings of alienation from other peers who have not experienced a similar loss, particularly when reminders of this difference are salient (e.g., seeing other classmates' parents coming to a school event); children and adolescents might conceal their own grief reactions to protect their caregivers from additional distress C10: Feeling that life is meaningless or empty without the deceased or the belief that they cannot function without the deceased C11: Confusion about their role in life or a diminished sense of their identity Developmental regressions (e.g., regression in toileting or language among young children; loss of study skills or emotion regulation in adolescents are common, as are disruptions to sleep and appetite patterns; adolescents can show a lack of engagement in preparations for adulthood (e.g., applying to jobs) Youth can express sadness over lost opportunities they were planning to experience with their deceased caregiver (e.g., riding a bicycle, walking down the aisle at their wedding); adolescents might show disorganization, lack of direction, or both The letters and numbers reter to the symptom within each diagnostic criterion (e.g., criterion B, 4th symptom). Persistent complex bereavement disorder symptom criteria and descriptions have been adapted to the context of parental death. From Kentor RA, Kaplow JB. Supporting children and adolescents following parental bereavement: guidance for health-care professionals. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2020,4:889-898, p 891. and personal loss complicates the bereavement process as grief reactions become interwoven with posttraumatic stress symptoms (see Chapter 38). After a death resulting from aggressive or traumatic circumstances, access to expert help may be required. Under conditions of threat and fear, chil- dren seek proximity to safe, stable, protective figures. It is important for parents to grieve with their children. Some par- ents want to protect their children from their grief, so they put on an outwardly brave front or do not talk about the deceased family member or traumatic event. Instead of the desired protective effect, the child receives the message that demonstrating grief or talking about death is wrong, leading the child to feel isolated, grieve privately, or delay grieving. The child may also conclude that the parents did not really care about the deceased because they seem to have forgotten the person so easily or demonstrate no emotion. The parents' efforts to avoid talk- ing about the death may cause the parents to isolate themselves from their children at a time when the children most need them. Children need to know that their parents love them and will continue to protect them. Children need opportunities to talk about their relative's death and associated memories. A surviving sibling may feel guilty simply because he or she survived, especially if the death was the result of an accident that involved both children. Siblings' grief, especially when compounded by feelings of guilt, may manifest as regressive behavior or anger. Parents should be informed of this possibility and encouraged to discuss it with their children. 

Table 30.3 Recommendations for Healthcare Professionals for Helping Children After Bereavement • Help children and families recognize that there is no correct way to grieve and that every child grieves differently • grief, and childs receprize their grief ret is no tines dife entit • Help caregivers understand that the circumstances of the death can play a major role in children's grief reactions, and deaths by homicide or suicide might be especially difficult for children (therefore could require more intensive mental healthcare) • Empower caregivers by explaining they can be instrumental in facilitating adaptive grief in their children by providing empathy, reassurance, and a listening ear, and talking openly about the deceased person with their child • Help caregivers to use language accessible to children when talking about the death, meaning that they should use simple and straightforward language that is appropriate for the child's developmental stage, and let the child ask questions as opposed to providing a lot of detailed information • Provide accurate information to children about the cause of death; children can become preoccupied with thoughts about contagion (e.g., "will | catch cancer too?") or worries about the caregiver's level of suffering (e.g., "did it hurt when my dad had a stroke?"), and healthcare professionals can help children understand the circumstances of the death and assist in alleviating some of these concerns • Never underestimate the importance of simply bearing witness to a child's grief; our society often sends children messages that it is not okay to talk about their own grief, and in allowing them the space to do that, healthcare professionals can help to both normalize and validate their reactions. From Kentor RA, Kaplow JB. Supporting children and adolescents following parental bereavement: guidance for health-care professionals. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2020;4:889-898, p 896. DEVELOPMENTAL PERSPECTIVE Children's responses to death reflect the family's current culture, their past heritage, their experiences, and the sociopolitical environment. Personal experience with terminal illness and dying may also facili- tate children's comprehension of death and familiarity with mourning. Developmental differences exist in children's efforts to make sense of and master the concept and reality of death and profoundly influence their grief reactions. Children younger than 3 years have little or no understanding of the concept of death. Despair, separation anxiety, and detachment may occur at the withdrawal of nurturing caretakers. Young children may respond in reaction to observing distress in others, such as a parent or sibling who is crying, withdrawn, or angry. Young children also express signs and symptoms of grief in their emotional states, such as irritabil- ity or lethargy, and in severe cases, mutism. If the reaction is severe, failure to thrive may occur. Preschool children are in the preoperational cognitive stage, in which communication takes place through play and fantasy (see Chapter 25). They do not show well-established cause-and-effect reasoning. They may feel that death is reversible, analogous to someone going away. In attempts to master the finality and perma- nence of death, preschoolers frequently ask unrelenting, repeated questions about when the person who died will be returning. This makes it difficult for parents, who may become frustrated because they do not understand why the child keeps asking and do not like the constant reminders of the person's death. The primary care pro- vider has a very important role in helping families understand the child's struggle to comprehend death. Preschool children typically Chapter 30 • Loss, Separation, and Bereavement 199 express magical explanations of death events, sometimes resulting in guilt and self-blame ( "He died because I wouldn't play with him"; "She died because I was mad at her"). Some children have these thoughts but do not express them verbally because of embarrass- ment or guilt. Parents and primary care providers need to be aware of magical thinking and must reassure preschool children that their thoughts had nothing to do with the outcome. Children of this age are often frightened by prolonged, powerful expressions of grief by others. Children conceptualize events in the context of their own experiential reality, and therefore consider death in terms of sleep, separation, and injury. Young children express grief intermittently and show marked affective shifts over brief periods. Younger school-age children think concretely, recognize that death is irreversible, but believe it will not happen to them or affect them, and begin to understand biologic processes of the human body ("You'll die if your body stops working"). Information gath- ered from the media, peers, and parents forms lasting impressions. Consequently, they may ask candid questions about death that adults will have difficulty addressing ("He must have been blown to pieces, huh?"). Children approximately 9 years and older do understand that death is irreversible and that it may involve them or their families. These chil- dren tend to experience more anxiety, overt symptoms of depression, and somatic complaints than do younger children. School-age children are often left with anger focused on the loved one, those who could not save the deceased, or those presumed responsible for the death. Contact with the primary care clinician may provide great reassurance, especially for the child with somatic symptoms, and particularly when the death followed a medical illness. School and learning problems may also occur, often linked to difficulty concentrating or preoccupation with the death. Close collaboration with the child's school may provide important diagnostic information and offer opportunities to mobilize intervention or support. At 12-14 years of age, children begin to use symbolic thinking, reason abstractly, and analyze hypothetical, or "what if," scenarios systematically. Death and the end of life become concepts rather than events. Teenagers are often ambivalent about dependence and independence and may withdraw emotionally from surviving family members, only to mourn in isolation. Adolescents begin to understand complex physiologic systems in relationship to death. Because they are often egocentric, they may be more concerned about the impact of the death on themselves than about the deceased or other family members. Fascination with dramatic, sensational, or romantic death sometimes occurs and may find expression in copycat behavior, such as cluster suicides, as well as competitive behavior, to forge emotional links to the deceased person ( He was my best friend"). Somatic expression of grief may revolve around highly complex syndromes such as eating disorders (see Chapter 41) or conversion reactions (Chapter 35), as well as symptoms lim- ited to the more immediate perceptions (stomachaches). Quality of life takes on meaning, and the teenager develops a focus on the future. Depression, resentment, mood swings, rage, and risk-taking behaviors can emerge as the adolescent seeks answers to questions of values, safety, evil, and fairness. Alternately, adolescents may seek philosophic or spiritual explanations ("being at peace") to ease their sense of loss. The death of a peer may be especially traumatic. Families often struggle with how to inform their children of the death of a family member. The answer depends on the child's devel- opmental level. It is best to avoid misleading euphemisms and meta- phor. A child who is told that the relative who died "went to sleep" may become frightened of falling asleep, resulting in sleep problems or nightmares. Children can be told that the person is "no longer liv- or "no longer moving or feeling." Using examples of pets that have died sometimes can help children gain a more realistic idea of the meaning of death. Parents who have religious beliefs may com- fort their children with explanations, such as, "Your sister's soul is in heaven," or "Grandfather is now with God," provided those beliefs are honestly held. If these are not religious beliefs that the parents share, children will sense the insincerity and experience anxiety rather than 

200 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior the hoped-for reassurance. Children's books about death can provide an important source of information, and when read together, these books may help the parent to find the right words while addressing the child's needs. ROLE OF THE PEDIATRIC HEALTHCARE PROVIDER The pediatric healthcare provider who has had a longitudinal rela- tionship with the family will be an important source of support in the disclosure of bad news and in critical decision-making, during both the dying process and the bereavement period (see Table 30.3). The involvement of the healthcare provider may include being pres- ent at the time the diagnosis is disclosed, at the hospital or home at the time of death, being available to the family by phone during the bereavement period, sending a sympathy card, attending the funeral, and scheduling a follow-up visit. Attendance at the funeral sends a strong message that the family and their child are impor- tant, respected by the healthcare provider, and can also help the pediatric healthcare provider to grieve and reach personal closure about the death. A family meeting 1-3 months later may be help- ful because parents may not be able to formulate their questions at the time of death. This meeting allows the family time to ask questions, share concerns, and review autopsy findings (if one was performed), and allows the healthcare provider to determine how the parents and family are adjusting to the death. Instead of leaving the family feeling abandoned by a healthcare sys- tem that they have counted on, this visit allows them to have continued support. This is even more important when the healthcare provider will be continuing to provide care for surviving siblings. The visit can be used to determine how the mourning process is progressing, detect evidence of marital discord, and evaluate how well surviving siblings are coping. This is also an opportunity to evaluate whether referrals to support groups or mental health providers may be of benefit. Continu- ing to recognize the child who has died is important. Families appreci- ate the receipt of a card on their child's birthday, around holidays, or the anniversary of their child's death. The healthcare provider needs to be an educator about disease, death, and grief. The pediatrician can offer a safe environment for the family to talk about painful emotions, express fears, and share memories. By giving families permission to talk and modeling how to address children's concerns, the clinician demystifies death. Par- ents often request practical help. The healthcare provider can offer families resources, such as literature (both fiction and nonfiction), referrals to therapeutic services, and tools to help them learn about illness, loss, and grief. In this way the physician reinforces the sense that other people understand what they are going through and helps to normalize their distressing emotions. The healthcare provider can also facilitate and demystify the grief process by sharing basic tenets of grief therapy. There is no single right or wrong way to grieve. Everyone grieves differently; mothers may grieve differently than fathers, and children mourn differently than adults. Helping family members to respect these differences and reach out to sup- port each other is critical. Grief is not something to "get over"" but a lifelong process of adapting, readjusting, and reconnecting. Parents may need help in knowing what constitutes normal griev- ing. Hearing, seeing, or feeling their child's presence may be a normal response. Vivid memories or dreams may occur. The healthcare pro- vider can help parents to learn that, although their pain and sadness may seem intolerable, other parents have survived similar experiences, and their pain will lessen over time. Healthcare providers are often asked whether children should attend the funeral of a parent or sibling. These rituals allow the family to begin their mourning process. Children >4 years old should be given a choice. If the child chooses to attend, the child should have a desig- nated, trusted adult who is not part of the immediate family and who will stay with the child, offer comfort, and be willing to leave with the child if the experience proves to be overwhelming. If the child chooses not to attend, the child should be offered additional opportunities to share in a ritual, go to the cemetery to view the grave, tell stories about the deceased, or obtain a keepsake object from the deceased family member as a remembrance. In the era of regionalized tertiary care medicine, the primary care provider and medical home staff may not be informed when one of their patients dies in the hospital. Yet, this communication is criti- cally important. Families assume their primary care provider has been notified and often feel hurt when they do not receive some symbol of condolence. Because of their longitudinal relationship with the family, primary care providers may offer much needed support. There are practical issues, such as the need to cancel previ- ously made appointments and to alert office and nursing staff so that they are prepared should the family return for a follow-up visit or for ongoing health maintenance care with the surviving siblings. Even minor illnesses in the surviving siblings may frighten chil- dren. Parents may contribute to this anxiety because their inabil- ity to protect the child who has died may leave them with a sense of guilt or helplessness. They may seek medical attention sooner or may be hypervigilant in the care of the siblings because of guilt over the other child's death, concern about their judgment, or the need for continued reassurance. A primary care visit can do much to allay their fears. Clinicians must remain vigilant for risk factors in each family mem- ber and in the family unit as a whole. Primary care providers, who care for families over time, know bereft patients' premorbid functioning and can identify those at current or future risk for physical and psy- chiatric morbidity. Providers must focus on symptoms that interfere with a patient's normal activities and compromise a child's attainment of developmental tasks. Symptom duration, intensity, and severity, in context with the family's culture, can help identify complicated grief reactions in need of therapeutic attention (see Table 30.2). Descrip tive words such as "unrelenting," "intense, "intrusive," or "prolonged" should raise concern. Total absence of signs of mourning, specifically an inability to discuss the loss or express sadness, also suggests poten- No specific sign, symptom, or cluster of behaviors identifies the child or family in need of help. Further assessment is indicated if the following occur: (1) persistent somatic or psychosomatic com- plaints of undetermined origin (headache, stomachache, eating and sleeping disorders, conversion symptoms, symptoms related to the deceased's condition, hypochondriasis); (2) unusual circumstances of death or loss (sudden, violent, or traumatic death; inexplicable, unbelievable, or particularly senseless death; prolonged, compli- cated illness; unexpected separation); (3) school or work difficulties (declining grades or school performance, social withdrawal, aggres- sion); (4) changes in home or family functioning (multiple family stresses, lack of social support, unavailable or ineffective function- ing of caretakers, multiple disruptions in routines, lack of safety); and (5) concerning psychologic factors (persistent guilt or blame, desire to die or talk of suicide, severe separation distress, disturb- ing hallucinations, self-abuse, risk-taking behaviors, symptoms of trauma such as hyperarousal or severe flashbacks, grief from previ- ous or multiple deaths). Children who are intellectually impaired may require additional support. TREATMENT Suggesting interventions outside the natural support network of fam- ily and friends can often prove useful to grieving families. Bereave- ment counseling should be readily offered if needed or requested by the family. Interventions that enhance or promote attachments and security, as well as give the family a means of expressing and under- standing death, help to reduce the likelihood of future or prolonged disturbance, especially in children. Collaboration between pediatric and mental health professionals can help determine the timing and appropriateness of services. Interventions for children and families who are struggling to cope with a loss in the community include gestures such as sending a card or offering food to the relatives of the deceased and teaching children the etiquette of behaviors and rituals around bereavement and mutual support. Performing community service or joining 

charitable organizations, such as fund-raising in memory of the deceased, may be useful. In the wake of a disaster, parents and older siblings can give blood or volunteer in search and recovery efforts. When a loss does not involve an actual death (e.g., parental divorce, geograph relocation, shower a the child to did in towa party may help. Participating in a constructive activity moves the family away from a sense of helplessness and hopelessness and helps them find meaning in their loss. Psychotherapeutic services may benefit the entire family or individual members. Many support or self-help groups focus on specific types of losses (sudden infant death syndrome, suicide, widow/widowers, AIDS) and provide an opportunity to talk with other people who have experienced similar losses. Family, couple, sibling, or individual counseling may be useful, depending on the nature of the residual coping issues. Combinations of approaches may work well for children or parents with evolving needs. A child may participate in family therapy to deal with the loss of a sibling and use individual treatment to address issues of personal ambiva- lence and guilt related to the death. The question of pharmacologic intervention for grief reactions often arises. Explaining that medication does not cure grief and often does not reduce the intensity of some symptoms (separation distress) can help. Although medication can blunt reactions, the psy- chologic work of grieving still must occur. The physician must con- sider the patient's premorbid psychiatric vulnerability, current level of functioning, other available supports, and the use of additional therapeutic interventions. Medication as a first line of defense rarely proves useful in normal or uncomplicated grief reactions. In certain situations (severe sleep disruption, incapacitating anxiety, intense hyperarousal), an anxiolytic or antidepressant may help to achieve symptom relief and provide the patient with the emotional energy to mourn. Medication used in conjunction with some form of psy- chotherapy, and in consultation with a psychopharmacologist, has optimal results. Children who are refugees and may have experienced war, vio- lence, or personal torture, while often resilient, may experience post- traumatic stress disorder if exposures were severe or repeated (see Chapters 15.3 and 38). Sequelae such as depression, anxiety, and grief need to be addressed, and mental health therapy is indicated. Cognitive-behavioral therapy, use of journaling and narratives to bear witness to the experiences, and use of translators may be SPIRITUAL ISSUES Responding to patients' and families' spiritual beliefs can help in comforting them during family tragedies. Offering to call mem- bers of pastoral care teams or their own spiritual leader can pro- vide needed support and can aid in decision-making. Families have found it important to have their beliefs and their need for hope acknowledged in end-of-life care. The majority of patients report welcoming discussions on spirituality, which may help individual patients cope with illness, disease, dying, and death. In addressing spirituality, physicians need to follow certain guidelines, including maintaining respect for the patient's beliefs, following the patients lead in exploring how spirituality affects the patient's decision- making, acknowledging the limits of their own expertise and role in spirituality, and maintaining their own integrity by not saying or doing anything that violates their own spiritual or religious views. Healthcare providers should not impose their own religious or non- religious beliefs on patients, but rather should listen respectfully to their patients. By responding to spiritual needs, clinicians may bet- ter aid their patients and families in end-of-life care and bereave- ment and take on the role of healers. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 31 • Sleep Medicine 201 Chapter 31 Sleep Medicine Judith A. Owens and Seyni Gueye-Ndiaye BASICS OF SLEEP AND CHRONOBIOLOGY Sleep and wakefulness are a highly complex and intricately regulated neurobiologic system that both influences and is influenced by all phys- iologic systems in the body, as well as by the environment and socio- cultural practices. The concept of sleep regulation is based on what is usually referred to as the "two-process model" because it requires the simultaneous operation of two basic, highly coupled processes that govern sleep and wakefulness. The homeostatic process ("Process S"), regulates the length and depth of sleep and is thought to be related to the accumulation of adenosine and other sleep-promoting chemicals (somnogens"), such as cytokines, during prolonged periods of wake- fulness. This sleep pressure appears to build more quickly in infants and young children, thus limiting the duration that wakefulness can be sustained during the day and necessitating periods of daytime sleep (i.e., naps). The endogenous circadian rhythms ("Process C") influ- ence the internal organization of sleep and the timing and duration of daily sleep-wake cycles and govern predictable patterns of alertness throughout the 24-hour day. The "master circadian clock" or "circadian pacemaker" that controls sleep-wake patterns, of which melatonin secretion is the principal bio- marker, is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the anterior hypo- thalamus. In addition, "circadian clocks" are present in virtually every cell in the body, which in turn govern the timing of multiple other physiologic systems (e.g., cardiovascular reactivity, hormone levels, renal and pulmonary functions). Because the human circadian clock is slightly longer than 24 hours, intrinsic circadian rhythms must be synchronized or "entrained" to the 24 hour-day cycle by environmental cues called zeitgebers. The dark-light cycle is the most powerful of the zeitgebers; light signals are transmitted to the suprachiasmatic nucleus via the circadian photoreceptor system within the retina (functionally and anatomically separate from the visual system), which switch the pineal gland's production of the hormone melatonin off (light) or on (dark). Circadian rhythms are also synchronized by other external time cues, such as timing of meals and clock time. Sleep propensity, the relative level of sleepiness or alertness experi- enced at any given time during a 24-hour period, is partially determined by the homeostatic sleep drive, which in turn depends on the duration and quality of previous sleep and the amount of time awake since the last sleep period. Interacting with this sleep homeostat is the 24-hour cyclic pattern or rhythm characterized by clock-dependent periods of maximum sleepiness and maximum alertness. There are two periods of maximum sleepiness, one in the late afternoon (approximately 3:00- 5:00 рм) and one toward the end of the night (around 3:00-5:00 A), and two periods of maximum alertness, one in mid-morning and one in the evening just before the onset of natural sleep, the so-called for- bidden zone or second-wind phenomenon, which allows for the main- tenance of wakefulness in the face of an accumulated sleep drive. There are significant health, safety, and performance consequences of failure to meet basic sleep needs, termed insufficient/inadequate sleep or sleep loss. Sufficient sleep is a biologic imperative, necessary for optimal brain and body functioning. Slow-wave sleep (SWS) (i.e., N3, delta, or deep sleep) appears to be the most restorative form of sleep; it is entered relatively quickly after sleep onset, is preserved in the face of reduced total sleep time and increases (rebounds) after a night of restricted sleep. These restorative properties of sleep may be linked to the "glymphatic system," which increases clearance of metabolic waste 

202 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior products, including B-amyloid, produced by neural activity in the awake brain. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep (stage R or "dream" sleep) appears to be involved in numerous important brain processes, including completion of vital cognitive functions (e.g., consolidation of memory), promoting the plasticity of the central nervous system (CNS), and protecting the brain from injury. Sufficient amounts of these sleep stages are necessary for optimal cognitive functioning and emotional and behavioral self-regulation. Partial sleep loss (ie., sleep restriction) on a chronic basis accumu- lates in a sleep debt and over several days produces deficits equivalent to those seen under conditions of one night of total sleep deprivation. If the sleep debt becomes large enough and is not voluntarily repaid by obtaining sufficient recovery sleep, the body may respond by overrid- ing voluntary control of wakefulness. This results in periods of decreased alertness, dozing off, and unplanned napping, recognized as excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS). The sleep-restricted individual may also expe- rience very brief (several seconds) repeated daytime microsleeps, of which the individual may be completely unaware, but which nonetheless may result in significant lapses in attention and vigilance. There is also a relationship between the amount of sleep restriction and performance on cognitive tasks, particularly those requiring sustained attention and higher-level cognitive skills (executive functions; see Chapter 49), with a decay in performance correlating with declines in sleep amounts. It has also been recognized that what may be globally described as "deficient" sleep involves alterations in both amount and timing of sleep. Misalignment of intrinsic circadian rhythms with extrinsic soci- etal demands, such a shift work and early school start times, is associ- ated with deficits in cognitive function and self-regulation, increased emotional and behavioral problems and risk-taking behaviors, and negative impacts on health, such as increased risk of cardiovascular disease, obesity, and metabolic dysfunction. Insufficient quantity of sleep, mistimed sleep, and poor-quality sleep frequently result in EDS and decreased daytime alertness levels. Sleepi- ness in children may be recognizable as drowsiness, yawning, and other classic "sleepy behaviors" as well as resumption of napping in older children and extending sleep when given the opportunity such as on weekends. If a child can sleep more, they need more sleep. EDS can also manifest as mood disturbance, including irritability, emotional lability, low frustration tolerance and depressed or negative mood; fatigue and daytime lethargy, including increased somatic complaints (headaches, gastrointestinal disturbances); cognitive impairment, including prob- lems with memory, attention, concentration, decision-making, and problem solving; daytime behavior problems, including hyperactivity, impulsivity, and noncompliance; and academic problems, including chronic tardiness related to insufficient sleep and school failure. While sleepiness and fatigue may overlap in their clinical presentation, sleepi- ness is characterized by the propensity to fall asleep, particularly under conditions of low stimulation (e.g., riding in the car), while fatigue is often described as a state of low energy, decreased motivation, and DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN SLEEP Sleep disturbances, as well as many characteristics of sleep itself, have some distinctly different features in children from sleep and sleep dis- orders in adults. Changes in sleep architecture and the evolution of sleep patterns and behaviors reflect the physiologic/chronobiologic, developmental, and social/environmental changes that are occurring across childhood. These trends may be summarized as the gradual assumption of more adult sleep patterns as children mature (Figs. 31.1 1. Sleep is the primary activity of the brain during early development; for example, by age 2 years, the average child has spent 9,500 hours (approximately 13 months) asleep vs 8,000 hours awake, and be- tween 2 and 5 years, the time asleep is equal to the time awake. 2. There is a gradual decline in the average 24-hour sleep duration from infancy through adolescence, which involves a decrease in both di- urnal and nocturnal sleep amounts. The decline in daytime sleep (scheduled napping) results in termination of naps typically by age 5 years, although there is clearly considerable variability in the age 8.0 7.0 ₴ 6.0 2 5.0 me 4.0 Davti 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 Age (mo) - Avg •- - -1SD ----- +1SD *••••• -2SD **•••• +2SD Fig. 31.1 Daytime sleep duration in intants ages 3-24 mo. SD, Stand- ard deviation. (From Paavonen EJ, Saarenpaa-Heikkila O, Morales- Viunoz, I, et al. Normal sleep development in intants: findings from two large birth cohorts. Sleep Med. 2020;69:145-154. Fig. 2, p 149.) at which children cease napping. There is also a gradual continued decrease in nocturnal sleep amounts into late adolescence; however, adolescents still require 8-10 hours of sleep per night. 3. There is also a decline in the relative percentage of REM sleep from birth (50% of sleep) through early childhood into adulthood (25- 30%), and a similar initial predominance of SWS that peaks in early childhood, drops off abruptly after puberty (40-60% decline), and then further decreases over the life span. This SWS preponderance in early life has clinical significance; for example, the high prevalence of partial arousal parasomnias (sleepwalking and sleep terrors) in preschool- and early school-age children is related to the relative increased percentage of SWS in this age-group. 4. The within-sleep ultradian cycle lengthens from about 50 minutes in the term infant to 90-110 minutes in the school-age child. This has clinical significance in that typically a brief arousal or awaken- ing occurs during the night at the termination of each ultradian cycle. As the length of the cycles increase, there is a concomitant decrease in the number of these end-of-cycle arousals (night wak- 5. A gradual shift in the circadian sleep-wake rhythm to a delayed (later) sleep onset and offset time, linked to pubertal stage rather than chronologic age, begins with pubertal onset in middle child- hood and accelerates in early to mid-adolescence. This biologic phe- nomenon often coincides with environmental factors, which further delay bedtime and advance wake time and result in insufficient sleep duration, including exposure to electronic "screens" in the evening, social networking, academic and extracurricular demands, and early (before 8:30 м) high school start times. In addition, the accumula- tion of the homeostatic sleep drive across the day slows and both sensitivity and exposure to evening light increases (especially blue spectrum light from electronic devices) during adolescence, con- spiring to further delay sleep onset. 6. Increasing irregularity of sleep-wake patterns is typically observed across childhood into adolescence; this is characterized by increas- ingly larger discrepancies between school night and non-school night bedtimes and wake times, and increased "weekend oversleep" in an attempt to compensate for chronic weekday sleep insufhciency. This phenomenon, often referred to as "social jet lag," not only fails to adequately address performance dehcits associated with insuf- ficient sleep on school nights but further exacerbates the normal adolescent phase delay and results in additional circadian disruption (analogous to that experienced by shift workers). Table 31.1 lists normal developmental changes in children's sleep. COMMON SLEEP DISORDERS Childhood sleep problems may be conceptualized as resulting from (1) inadequate duration of sleep for age and sleep needs (insufficient sleep quantity); (2) disruption and fragmentation of sleep (poor 

Fig. 31.2 Nighttime sleep duration in infants ages 3-24 mo. SD, Stand- ard deviation. (From Paavonen EJ, Saarenpää-Heikkilä O, Morales- Munoz, I, et al. Normal sleep development in infants: findings from two large birth cohorts. Sleep Med. 2020;69:145-154. Fig. 3, p 149.) sleep quality) as a result of frequent, repetitive, and brief arousals during sleep; (3) misalignment of sleep-wake timing with circadian rhythms; or (4) CNS-mediated hypersomnia (EDS and increased sleep needs). Insufficient sleep is usually the result of difficulty ini- tiating (delayed sleep onset) or maintaining sleep (prolonged night wakings) but, especially in older children and adolescents, may also represent a conscious lifestyle decision to sacrifice sleep in favor of competing priorities, such as homework and social activities. The underlying causes of delayed sleep onset/prolonged night wakings or sleep fragmentation may in turn be related to primarily behavioral factors (e.g., bedtime resistance resulting in shortened sleep dura- tion) or medical causes (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea [OSA] causing frequent, brief arousals). Certain pediatric populations are relatively more vulnerable to acute or chronic sleep problems. These include children with chronic illnesses or pain conditions (e.g., cystic fibrosis, asthma, idiopathic juvenile arthritis) and acute illnesses (e.g., otitis media); children taking stimulants (e.g., psychostimulants, caffeine), sleep- disrupting medications (e.g., corticosteroids), or daytime-sedating medications (some anticonvulsants, a-agonists); hospitalized chil- dren; and children with a variety of psychiatric disorders, including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), depression, bipo- lar disorder, and anxiety disorders. Children with neurodevelop- mental disorders such as autism, intellectual disability, blindness, and some chromosomal syndromes (e.g., Smith-Magenis, fragile X) have especially high rates of sleep disturbances for a wide variety of reasons. They may have comorbid medical issues or may be tak- ing sleep-disrupting medications, may be more prone to nocturnal seizures, may be less easily entrained by environmental cues and thus more vulnerable to circadian disruption, and are more likely to have psychiatric and behavioral comorbidities that further pre- dispose them to disrupted sleep. Children from low socioeconomic households or minoritized racial and ethnic groups, as well as chil- dren in alternative care such as foster placement, are more likely to experience, are less likely to be diagnosed and treated, and are more vulnerable to the negative impact of sleep disorders resulting in significant sleep health disparities. Insomnia of Childhood Insomnia is defined as difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep that occurs despite age-appropriate time and opportunity for sleep and results in some degree of impairment in daytime functioning for the child and/or family (ranging from fatigue, irritability, lack of energy, and mild cognitive impairment to effects on mood, school performance, and quality of life). Insomnia may be of a short-term and transient nature (usually related to an acute event) or may be characterized as long-term and chronic. Insomnia is a set of symp- toms with many possible etiologies (e.g., pain, medication, medical/ Chapter 31 • Sleep Medicine 203 13.0 12.0 Nighttime sleep (hr) 11.0 10.0 8.0 7.0 6.0 2 4 6 → Avg 8 •- —1SD - 10 12 14 Age (mo) - +1SD •• 16 18 20 22 • -2SD •...••• +/oU 24 psychiatric conditions, learned behaviors). As with many behavioral issues in children, insomnia is often primarily defined by parental concerns rather than by objective criteria and therefore should be viewed in the context of family (maternal depression, stress), child (temperament, developmental level), and environmental (cultural practices, sleeping space) considerations. While current terminology (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition, 2015; International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 3rd edition, 2014) groups most types of insom- nia in both children and adults under a single category of Chronic Insomnia Disorder, the descriptor of Behavioral Insomnia of Child- hood and its subtypes (Sleep Onset Association and Limit Setting) remains a useful construct in clinical practice, particularly for young children (0-5 years). One of the most common presentations of insomnia found in infants and toddlers is the sleep-onset associ- ation type. In this situation the child learns to fall asleep only under certain conditions or associations, which typically require parental presence, such as being rocked or fed, and does not develop the ability to self-soothe. During the night, when the child experiences the type of brief arousal that normally occurs at the end of an ultra- dian sleep cycle or awakens for other reasons, the child is not able to get back to sleep without those same associations being pres- ent. The infant then "signals" the parent by crying (or coming into the parents' bedroom if the child is ambulatory) until the necessary associations are provided. The presenting complaint is typically one of prolonged night waking requiring caregiver intervention and resulting in insufficient sleep (for both child and caregiver). Management of night wakings should include establishment of a set sleep schedule and bedtime routine and implementation of program. The treatment approach typically involves a program of rapid withdrawal (extinction) or more gradual with- drawal (graduated extinction) of parental assistance at sleep onset and during the night. Extinction ("cry it out") involves putting the child to bed at a designated bedtime, "drowsy but awake," to maxi- mize sleep propensity and then systematically ignoring any protests by the child until a set time the next morning. Although it has con- siderable empirical support, extinction is often not an acceptable choice for families. Graduated extinction (aka "check-ins," ber method," "sleep training") involves gradually weaning the child from dependence on parental presence; typically, the parent leaves the room at "lights out" and then returns or "checks" periodically at fixed or successively longer intervals during the sleep-wake transi- tion to provide brief reassurance until the child falls asleep. The exact interval between checks is generally determined by the par- ents' tolerance for crying and the child's temperament; the goal is to allow enough time between checks for the child to fall asleep independently while avoiding extended time intervals that result in continued escalation of protest behaviors such as screaming and 

204 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 31.1 Normal Developmental Changes in Children's Sleep SLEEP DURATION* AND AGE CATEGORY SLEEP PATTERNS Newborn (0-2 mo) • Total sleep: 10-19 hr per 24hr (average, 13-14.5hr), may be higher in premature babies. • Bottle-fed babies generally sleep for longer periods (2-5 hr bouts) than breastted babies (1-3 hr). • Sleep periods are separated by 1-2 hr awake. • No established nocturnal-diurnal pattern in first few wk; sleep is evenly distributed throughout the day and night, averaging 8.5 hr at night and 5.75 hr during day. Infant (2-12 mo) Toddler (1-2yr) Preschool (3-5yr) • Recommended sleep duration (4-12 mo) is 12-16hr (note that there is great individual variability in sleep times during infancy). • Recommended sleep amount is 11-14 hr (including naps). • Naps decrease from two to one nap at average age of 18 mo. • Recommended sleep amount is 10-13 hr (including naps). • Overall, 26% of 4 yr olds and just 15% of 5 yr olds nap. ADDITIONAL SLEEP ISSUES • American Academy of Pediatrics issued a revised recommendation in 2016 advocating against bed-sharing in the first year of life, instead encouraging proximate but separate sleeping surfaces for mother and infant for at least the first 6 mo and preferably first year of • Safe sleep practices for infants: • Place baby on his or her back to sleep at night and during nap times. • Place baby on a firm mattress with well-fitting sheet in safety-approved crib. • Do not use pillows or comforters. • Standards require crib bars to be no farther SLEEP DISORDERS • Most sleep issues perceived as problematic at this stage represent a discrepancy between parental expectations and developmentally appropriate sleep behaviors. • Newborns who are extremely fussy and persistently difficult to console, as noted by parents, are more likely to have underlying medical issues such as colic, gastroesophageal reflux, and formula intolerance. • Make sure baby's face and head stay uncovered and clear of blankets and other • Sleep requlation or self-soothing involves the • Behavioral insomnia of infants ability to negotiate the sleep-wake childhood; sleep-onset transition, both at sleep onset and following association type normal awakenings throughout the night. The • Sleep-related rhythmic capacity to self-soothe begins to develop in movements (head banging, the first 12wk of life and is a reflection of both body rocking) neurodevelopmental maturation and learning. • Sleep consolidation, or "sleeping through the night," is usually defined by parents as a continuous sleep episode without the need for parental intervention (e.g., feeding, soothing) from the child's bedtime through the early morning. Infants develop the ability to consolidate sleep between 6 wk and 3 mo. • Cognitive, motor, social, and language developmental issues impact sleep • Nighttime fears develop; transitional objects and bedtime routines are important. • Persistent cosleeping tends to be highly associated with sleep problems in this age- group. • Sleep problems may become chronic. • Behavioral insomnia of childhood, sleep-onset association type • Behavioral insomnia of childhood, limit-setting type • Behavioral insomnia of childhood, limit-setting type • Sleepwalking, sleep terrors, nighttime fears/nightmares, obstructive sleep apnea syndrome : Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome • Insufficient sleep Middle childhood • Recommended sleep amount • School and behavior problems may be related (6-12 yr) is 9-12 hr. to sleep problems. • Media and electronics, such as television, computer, video games, and the internet, increasingly compete for sleep time. • Irregularity of sleep-wake schedules reflects increasing discrepancy between school and non-school night bedtimes and wake times. Adolescence (13-18 yr) • Recommended sleep amount • Puberty-mediated phase delay (later sleep is 8-10 hr. onset and wake times), relative to sleep-wake • Later bedtimes; increased cycles in middle childhood discrepancy between sleep: Earlier required wake times patterns on weekdays and Environmental competing priorities for sleep : sufferent se-wake phase disorder : Restes legs syndrome/ periodic limb movement disorder *All recommended sleep amounts from Paruthi S, Brooks LJ, D'Ambrosio C, et al. Recommended amount of sleep for pediatric populations: a consensus statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. J Clin Sleep Med. 2016;12:785-786. weekends gagging/vomiting. This allows the infant or child to develop the skills necessary for self-soothing at bedtime and also during the night. Sleep training is typically not instituted until about 6 months of age, but the practice of putting the infant to sleep "drowsy but awake starting at 3-4 months to encourage self-soothing may avoid the need for later intervention. In older infants and young chil- dren, the introduction of more appropriate sleep associations that will be readily available to the child during the night (transitional 

objects, such as a blanket or toy), in addition to positive reinforce- ment (stickers for remaining in bed), is often beneficial. As healthy, normally growing full-term infants no longer need night feedings from a nutritional standpoint, if the child has become habituated to awaken for nighttime feedings (learned hunger), these feedings should be eliminated (either "cold turkey" or by gradually decreas- ing volume and the milk:water ratio). Parents must be consistent in applying behavioral interventions to avoid inadvertent, intermittent reinforcement of night wakings. They should also be forewarned that crying behavior often temporarily escalates at the beginning of treatment (postextinction burst). Bedtime problems, including stalling and refusing to go to bed, are more common in preschool-age and older children. This type of insomnia is frequently related to inadequate limit setting at bedtime such as an ability or unwillingness to set consistent bedtime rules, and enforce a regular bedtime. In some cases, caregivers have adopted an inconsistent approach to night wakings that involves intermittently allowing the child to share their bed. This type of sleep problem may be associated with parental difficulty in setting limits or managing behavior in general and may be exacerbated by a child's tendency to engage in oppositional behavior. In some cases, the child's resistance at bedtime is the result of an underlying problem in falling asleep that is caused by other factors (medical conditions such as asthma or medica- tion use; a sleep disorder such as restless legs syndrome; anxiety) or a mismatch between the child's intrinsic circadian rhythm ("night owl") and parental expectations regarding an "appropriate" bedtime. Successful treatment of limit-setting sleep problems generally involves a combination of parent education regarding appropriate limit setting, decreased parental attention for bedtime-delaying behavior, establishment of bedtime routines, and positive reinforcement (sticker charts) for appropriate behavior at bedtime and during the night. For problematic night wakings, it is essential for caregivers to have a con- sistent response (eg., returning the child to their bedroom after every night waking). Other behavioral management strategies that have empirical support include bedtime fading, or temporarily setting the bedtime closer to the actual sleep-onset time and then gradually advancing the bedtime to an earlier target bedtime. Older children may benefit from being taught relaxation techniques to help themselves fall asleep or back to sleep more readily. Following the principles of healthy sleep practices for children is essential (Table 31.2). A third type of childhood insomnia is related to a mismatch between parental expectations regarding time in bed and the child's intrinsic sleep needs. If, as illustrated in Figure 31.3, a child's typical sleep time is 10 hours but the "sleep window" is set for 12 hours (7 PM to 7 AM), the result is likely to be a prolonged sleep onset of 2 hours, an extended period of wakefulness during the night, or early morning waking (or a combination); these periods are usually characterized by "normal" wakefulness in the child that is not accompanied by excessive distress. This situation is important to recognize because the solution (reducing the time in bed to actual sleep time) is typically simple and effective. Another form of insomnia that is more common in older chil- dren and adolescents has often been referred to as psychophysiologic, primary, or learned insomnia. Primary insomnia occurs mainly in adolescents and is characterized by a combination of learned sleep- preventing associations and heightened physiologic arousal resulting in a complaint of sleeplessness and decreased daytime functioning. A hallmark of primary insomnia is excessive worry about sleep and an exaggerated concern of the potential daytime consequences. The physi- ologic arousal can be in the form of cognitive hypervigilance, such as "racing" thoughts; in many individuals with insomnia, an increased baseline level of arousal is further intensified by this secondary anxi- ety about sleeplessness. Treatment usually involves educating the ado- lescent about the principles of healthy sleep practices (Table 31.3), institution of a consistent sleep-wake schedule, avoidance of daytime napping, instructions to use the bed for sleep only and to get out of bed if unable to fall asleep (stimulus control), restricting time in bed to the actual time asleep (sleep restriction), addressing maladaptive cognitions about sleep, and teaching relaxation techniques to reduce anxiety (cog- nitive behavioral therapy for insomnia [CBT-I]). Chapter 31 • Sleep Medicine 205 Table 31.2 Basic Principles of Healthy Sleep for Children 1. Have a set bedtime and bedtime routine for your child Bedtime and wake-up time should be about the same time on school nights and non-school nights. There should not be more than about 1 hr difference from one day to another. 3. Make the hour before bed shared quiet time. Avoid high-energy activities, such as rough play, and stimulating activities, such as watching television or playing computer games, just before bed. 4. Don't send your child to bed hungry. A light snack (e.g., milk and cookies) before bed is a good idea. Heavy meals within 1 hr or 2 of bedtime, however, may interfere with sleep 5. Avoid products containing caffeine for at least several hours before bedtime. These include caffeinated sodas, coffee, tea, Make sure your child spends time outside every day, whenever possible, and is involved in regular exercise. Keep your child's bedroom quiet and dark. A low-level night light is acceptable for children who find completely dark rooms frightening. 8. Keep your child's bedroom at a comfortable temperature during the night (<24°C (75°F]). 9. Don't use your child's bedroom for time-out or punishment. Keep the television out of your child's bedroom. Children can easily develop the bad habit of "needing" the television to fall asleep. It is also much more difficult to control your child's viewing if the set is in the bedroom. Time in bed (12 hours) ASLEEP AWAKE Bedtime = 1900 ASLEEP AWAKE Wake time = 0700 ASLEEP ASLEEP AWAKE Sleep need (10 hours) Fig. 31.3 Mismatch between sleep needs/duration and time in bed, resulting in insomnia. The keys to successful behavioral sleep interventions involve form- ing an alliance with the family, negotiating tailored solutions that are more likely to be effective if families can be successful in implementing them, and setting appropriate agreed-on treatment goals with planned follow-up. Behavioral treatments for insomnia, even in young children, appear to be highly effective and well tolerated. Several studies have failed to demonstrate long-term negative effects of behavioral strategies such as "sleep training" on parent-child relationships and attachment, psychosocial-emotional functioning, and chronic stress. It should also be emphasized that, as in adults, behavioral interventions are the first- line treatment for insomnia in children, and in general, hypnotic medi- cations or supplements such as melatonin are infrequently needed and should only be used as an adjunct to behavioral therapy to treat insom- nia in typically developing and healthy children. If cognitive behav- ior therapy and sleep hygiene practices are ineffective in children with autism spectrum disorders or ADHD, melatonin may be an additional effective therapy. 

206 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 31.3 Basic Principles of Healthy Sleep for 1. Wake up and go to bed at about the same time every night. Bedtime and wake-up time should not differ from school to non-school nights by more than approximately 1 hr. 2. Avoid sleeping in on weekends to "catch up" on sleep. This makes it more likely that you will have problems falling asleep. 3. If you take naps, they should be short (no more than 1 hr) and scheduled in the early to mid-afternoon. However, if you have a problem with falling asleep at night, napping during the day may make it worse and should be avoided. 4. Spend time outside every day. Exposure to sunlight helps to keep your body's internal clock on track. 5. Exercise regularly. Exercise may help you fall asleep and sleep 6. Use your bed for sleeping only. Don't study, read, listen to music, or watch television on your bed. 7. Make the 30-60 min before bedtime a quiet or wind-down time. Relaxing, calm, enjoyable activities, such as reading a book or listening to calm music, help your body and mind slow down enough to let you get to sleep. Don't study, watch exciting/scary movies, exercise, or get involved in "energizing" activities just 8. Eat regular meals, and don't go to bed hungry. A light snack before bed is a good idea; eating a full meal within 1 hr before 9. Avoid eating or drinking products containing caffeine from dinnertime to bedtime. These include caffeinated sodas, coffee, tea, and chocolate. 10. Do not use alcohol. Alcohol disrupts sleep and may cause you to awaken throughout the night. 11. Smoking (e.g., cigarettes) disturbs sleep. Although you should not smoke at all, if you do, do not smoke at least 2 hr before 12. Do not use sleeping pills, melatonin, or other nonprescription sleep aids to help you sleep unless specifically recommended by your doctor. These can be dangerous, and the sleep problems often return when you stop taking the medicine. Obstructive Sleep Apnea Sleep disordered breathing (SDB) in children encompasses a broad spectrum of respiratory disorders that occur exclusively in sleep or that are exacerbated by sleep, including primary snoring and upper air- way resistance syndrome, as well as apnea of prematurity (see Chapter 125) and central apnea (see Chapter 468.2). OSA, the most important clinical entity within the SDB spectrum, is characterized by repeated episodes of prolonged upper airway obstruction during sleep despite continued or increased respiratory effort, resulting in complete (apnea) or partial (hypopnea; ≥30% reduction in airflow accompanied by ≥3% 02 desaturation and/or arousal) cessation of airflow at the nose and/ or mouth, as well as disrupted sleep. Both intermittent hypoxia and the multiple arousals resulting from these obstructive events likely con- tribute to significant metabolic, cardiovascular, and neurocognitive- neurobehavioral morbidity. Primary snoring is defined as snoring without associated ventila- tory abnormalities on overnight polysomnogram (PSG) (e.g., no apneas or hypopneas, hypoxemia, hypercapnia) or respiratory-related arousals and is a manifestation of the vibrations of the oropharyngeal soft tissue walls that occur when an individual attempts to breathe against increased upper airway resistance during sleep. Although gen- erally considered nonpathologic, primary snoring in children may still be associated with subtle breathing abnormalities during sleep, includ- ing evidence of increased respiratory effort, which in turn may be asso- ciated with adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes that may be similar to those associated with OSA. Etiology OSA results from an anatomically or functionally narrowed upper airway; this typically involves some combination of decreased upper Table 31.4 Anatomic Factors That Predispose to Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome and Hypoventilation in Children NOSE Anterior nasal stenosis Choanal stenosis/atresia Deviated nasal septum Seasonal or perennial rhinitis Nasal polyps, foreign body, hematoma, mass lesion NASOPHARYNGEAL AND OROPHARYNGEAL Adenotonsillar hypertrophy Macroglossia Cystic hygroma Velopharyngeal flap repair Cleft palate repair Pharyngeal mass lesion CRANIOFACIAL Micrognathia/retrognathia Midface hypoplasia (e.g., trisomy 21, Crouzon disease, Apert syndrome) Mandibular hypoplasia (Pierre Robin, Treacher Collins, Cornelia de Lange syndromes) Craniofacial trauma Skeletal and storage diseases Achondroplasia Storage diseases (e.g., glycogen; Hunter, Hurler syndromes) airway patency (upper airway obstruction and/or decreased upper air- way diameter), increased upper airway collapsibility (reduced pharyn- geal muscle tone), and decreased drive to breathe in the face of reduced upper airway patency (reduced central ventilatory drive) (Table 31.4). Upper airway obstruction varies in degree and level (i.e., nose, naso- pharynx/oropharynx, hypopharynx) and is most frequently caused by adenotonsillar hypertrophy, although tonsillar size does not necessarily correlate with degree of obstruction, especially in older children. Other causes of airway obstruction include allergies associated with chronic rhinitis or nasal obstruction; craniofacial abnormalities, including hypoplasia or displacement of the maxilla and mandible; gastroesopha- geal reflux with resulting pharyngeal reactive edema (see Chapter 369); nasal septal deviation (Chapter 425); and velopharyngeal flap cleft pal- ate repair. Reduced upper airway tone may result from neuromuscular diseases, including hypotonic cerebral palsy and muscular dystrophies (see Chapter 649), or hypothyroidism (Chapter 603). Reduced central ventilatory drive may be present in some children with Arnold-Chiari malformation (see Chapter 631.09); rapid-onset obesity with hypo- thalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, and autonomic dysregulation (Chapter 65); and meningomyelocele (Chapter 631.04). In other situ- ations, the etiology is mixed; individuals with Down syndrome (see Chapter 57), because of their facial anatomy, hypotonia, macroglossia, and central adiposity, as well as the increased incidence of hypothy- roidism, are at particularly high risk for OSA, with some estimates of prevalence as high as 70%. Although children with OSA may be of normal weight, a large percentage are overweight or obese, and many of these children are school-age or younger. There is a significant correlation between weight and SDB (e.g., habitual snoring, OSA, sleep-related hypoventi- lation). Although adenotonsillar hypertrophy also plays an important etiologic role in overweight/obese children with OSA, mechanical fac- tors related to an increase in the amount of adipose tissue in the throat (pharyngeal fat pads), neck (increased neck circumference), and chest wall and abdomen can increase upper airway resistance, worsen gas exchange, and increase the work of breathing, particularly in the supine position and during REM sleep. A component of blunted central ven- tilatory drive in response to hypoxia/hypercapnia and hypoventilation may occur as well (see Chapter 468.2), particularly in children with morbid or syndrome-based (e.g., Prader-Willi) obesity. Overweight and obese children and adolescents are at particularly high risk for 

metabolic and cardiovascular complications of SDB, such as insulin resistance and systemic hypertension. Morbidly obese children are also at increased risk for postoperative complications as well as residual OSA after adenotonsillectomy. Epidemiology Overall prevalence of parent-reported snoring in the pediatric popula- tion is approximately 8%; "always" snoring is reported in 1.5-6%, and "often" snoring in 3-15%. When defined by parent-reported symptoms, the prevalence of OSA is 4-11%. The prevalence of pediatric OSA as documented by overnight sleep studies using ventilatory monitor- ing procedures (e.g., in-lab polysomnography, home studies) is 1-4% overall, with a reported range of 0.1-13%. Prevalence is also affected by the demographic characteristics such as age (increased prevalence between 2 and 8 years), gender (more common in males, especially after puberty), ethnicity (increased prevalence in African American and Asian children), history of prematurity, and family history of OSA. Pathogenesis The upregulation of inflammatory pathways, as indicated by an such as leptin) in both obese and nonobese children with OSA. Sys- temic inflammation and arousal-mediated increases in sympathetic autonomic nervous system activity with altered vasomotor tone may be key contributors to increased cardiovascular risk due to alterations in vascular endothelium in both adults and children with OSA. Other potential mechanisms that may mediate cardiovascular sequelae in adults and children with OSA include elevated systemic blood pres- sure and ventricular dysfunction. Mechanical stress on the upper air- way induced by chronic snoring may also result in both local mucosal inflammation of adenotonsillar tissues and subsequent upregulation of inflammatory molecules, most notably leukotrienes. One of the primary mechanisms by which OSA is believed to exert negative influences on cognitive function appears to involve repeated episodic arousals from sleep leading to sleep fragmentation and sleepi- ness. Equally important, intermittent hypoxia may lead directly to systemic inflammatory vascular changes in the brain. Levels of inflam- matory markers such as C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 are elevated in children with OSA and are also associated with cognitive dysfunction. Clinical Manifestations The clinical manifestations of OSA may be divided into sleep-related and daytime symptoms. The most common nocturnal manifestations of OSA in children and adolescents are loud, frequent, and disruptive snoring; breathing pauses; choking or gasping arousals; restless sleep; and nocturnal diaphoresis. Many children who snore do not have OSA, but few children with OSA do not snore (caregivers may not be aware of snoring in older children and adolescents). Children, like adults, tend to have more frequent and more severe obstructive events in REM sleep and when sleeping in the supine position. Children with OSA may adopt unusual sleeping positions, keeping their necks hyperex- tended to maintain airway patency. Frequent arousals associated with obstruction may result in nocturnal awakenings but are more likely to cause fragmented sleep. Daytime symptoms of OSA include mouth breathing and dry mouth, chronic nasal congestion or rhinorrhea, hyponasal speech, morning headaches, difhculty swallowing, and poor appetite. Children with OSA may have secondary enuresis, postulated to result from the disruption of the normal nocturnal pattern of atrial natriuretic pep- tide secretion by changes in intrathoracic pressure associated with OSA. Partial arousal parasomnias (sleepwalking and sleep terrors) may occur more frequently in children with OSA, related to the frequent associated arousals and an increased percentage of SWS. One of the most important but frequently overlooked sequelae of OSA in children is the effect on mood, behavior, learning, and aca- demic functioning. The neurobehavioral consequences of OSA in Chapter 31 • Sleep Medicine 207 children include daytime sleepiness with drowsiness, difficulty in morning waking, and unplanned napping or dozing off during activi- ties, although evidence of frank hypersomnolence tends to be less common in children compared to adults with OSA (except in very obese children or those with severe disease). Mood changes include increased irritability, mood instability and emotional dysregulation, low frustration tolerance, and depression or anxiety. Behavioral issues include both "internalizing" (i.e., increased somatic complaints and social withdrawal) and "externalizing" behaviors, including aggression, impulsivity, hyperactivity, oppositional behavior, and conduct prob- lems. There is substantial overlap between the clinical impairments associated with OSA and the diagnostic criteria for ADHD, including inattention, poor concentration, and distractibility (see Chapter 50). Many of the studies that have looked at changes in behavior and neuropsychologic functioning in children after treatment (usually ade- notonsillectomy) for OSA have found significant improvement in out- comes, both short term and long term, including daytime sleepiness, mood, behavior, academics, and quality of life. However, most studies failed to find a dose-dependent relationship between OSA in children and specific neurobehavioral-neurocognitive deficits, suggesting that other factors may influence neurocognitive outcomes, including indi- vidual genetic susceptibility, racial/ethnic background, environmental influences (e.g., passive smoking exposure), and comorbid conditions, such as obesity, shortened sleep duration, and other sleep disorders. Diagnosis The 2012 revised American Academy of Pediatrics clinical practice guidelines provide excellent information for the evaluation and man- agement of uncomplicated childhood OSA (Table 31.5). No physical examination findings are truly pathognomonic for OSA, and most healthy children with OSA appear normal; however, certain physical examination findings may suggest OSA. Growth parameters may be abnormal (obesity, or less frequently, failure to thrive), and there may be evidence of chronic nasal obstruction (hyponasal speech, mouth breathing, septal deviation) and signs of atopic disease (i.e., "allergic shiners"). Oropharyngeal examination may reveal enlarged tonsils, excess soft tissue in the posterior pharynx, and a narrowed posterior pharyngeal space, as well as craniofacial features associated with an increased risk of obstruction including "adenoidal facies" with open mouth posture and long/asymmetric face, midface hypoplasia, retrog- nathia and micrognathia, forward head posture (best appreciated by inspection of the frontal and lateral facial profile), and teeth crowding, narrow arched palate, and tongue tie (short frenulum). In severe cases the child may have evidence of pulmonary hypertension, right-sided heart failure, and cor pulmonale; systemic hypertension may occur, especially in obese children. Because no combination of clinical history and physical findings can accurately predict which children with snoring have OSA, the gold standard for diagnosing OSA remains an in-lab overnight PSG. Over- night PSG is a technician-supervised, monitored study that documents physiologic variables during sleep; sleep staging, arousal measurement, and body movements (electroencepha- lography [EEG], electrooculography, chin and leg electromyography [EMG], electrocardiogram, body position sensors, and video record- ing), and a combination of breathing monitors (oronasal thermal sen- sor and nasal air pressure transducer for airflow), chest/abdominal monitors (e.g., inductance plethysmography for respiratory effort, pulse oximeter for 02 saturation, end-tidal or transcutaneous CO, for CO, retention, snore microphone). The PSG parameter most often used in evaluating for sleep-disordered breathing is the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI), which indicates the number of apneic and hypopneic (both obstructive and central) events per hour of sleep. There are no universally accepted PSG normal reference values or parameters for diagnosing OSA in children, and it is still unclear which parameters best predict morbidity. Normal preschool- and school-age children generally have a total AHI <1.5 (obstructive AHI <1), and this is the most widely used cutoff value for OSA in children ≤12 years old; in older adolescents the adult cutoff of an AHI ≥5 is generally used. When AHI is between one and five obstructive events per hour, assessment of 

208 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Table 31.5 American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guideline: Diagnosis and Management of Childhood Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome Key Action Statement 1: Screening for OSA As part of routine health maintenance visits, clinicians should inquire whether the child or adolescent snores. If the answer is affirmative or if a child or adolescent presents with signs or symptoms of OSA, clinicians should perform a more focused evaluation. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.) Key Action Statement 2A: Polysomnography If a child or adolescent snores on a regular basis and has any of the complaints or findings of OSA, clinicians should either (1) obtain a polysomnogram (Evidence Quality: Grade A; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation) or (2) refer the patient to a sleep specialist or otolaryngologist for a more extensive evaluation. (Evidence Quality: Grade D; Recommendation Strength: Option.) Key Action Statement 2B: Alternative Testing If polysomnography is not available, clinicians may order alternative diagnostic tests, such as nocturnal video recording, nocturnal oximetry, daytime nap polysomnography, or ambulatory polysomnography. (Evidence Quality: Grade C; Recommendation Strength: Option.) Key Action Statement 3: Adenotonsillectomy If a child is determined to have OSA, has a clinical examination consistent with adenotonsillar hypertrophy, and does not have a contraindication to surgery, the clinician should recommend adenotonsillectomy as the first line of treatment. If the child has OSA but does not have adenotonsillar hypertrophy, other treatment should be considered (see Key Action Statement 6). Clinical judgment is required to determine the benefits of adenotonsillectomy compared with other treatments in obese children with varying degrees of adenotonsillar hypertrophy. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.) Key Action Statement 4: High-Risk Patients Undergoing Adenotonsillectomy Clinicians should monitor high-risk patients undergoing adenotonsillectomy as inpatients postoperatively. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.) Key Action Statement 5: Reevaluation Clinicians should clinically reassess all patients with OSA for persisting signs and symptoms after therapy to determine whether further treatment is required. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.) Key Action Statement 5B: Reevaluation of High-Risk Patients Clinicians should reevaluate high-risk patients for persistent OSA after adenotonsillectomy, including those who had a significantly abnormal baseline polysomnogram, have sequelae of OSA, are obese, or remain symptomatic after treatment, with an objective test (see Key Action Statement 2), or refer such patients to a sleep specialist. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.) Key Action Statement 6: CPAP Clinicians should refer patients for CPAP management if symptoms/signs or objective evidence of OSA persists after adenotonsillectomy or if adenotonsillectomy is not performed. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.) Key Action Statement 7: Weight Loss Clinicians should recommend weight loss in addition to other therapy if a child/adolescent with OSA is overweight or obese. (Evidence Quality: Grade C; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.) Key Action Statement 8: Intranasal Corticosteroids Clinicians may prescribe topical intranasal corticosteroids for children with mild OSA in whom adenotonsillectomy is contraindicated or for children with mild postoperative OSA. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Option.) CPAP, Continuous Positive Airway Pressure; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea. Adapted from Marcus CL, Brooks LJ, Draper KA, et al. Diagnosis and management of childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Pediatrics. 2012;130:576-584. additional PSG parameters (e.g., elevated CO, indicating obstructive hypoventilation, O2 desaturation, respiratory-related arousals), clini- cal judgment regarding risk factors for SDB, presence and severity of clinical symptoms, and evidence of daytime sequelae should determine further management. Treatment No universally accepted guidelines exist regarding the indications for treatment of pediatric SDB, including primary snoring and OSA. Rec- ommendations largely emphasize weighing what is known about the potential cardiovascular, metabolic, and neurocognitive sequelae of SDB in children in combination with the individual healthcare profes- sional's clinical judgment. The decision of whether and how to treat OSA specifically in children depends on several parameters, including severity (nocturnal symptoms, daytime sequelae, sleep study results), duration of disease, and individual patient variables such as age, comorbid conditions, and underlying etiologic factors. In the case of moderate (AHI 5-10) to severe (AHI >10) disease, the decision to treat is usually straightforward, and most pediatric sleep experts recom- mend that any child with AHI >5 should be treated. However, a large randomized trial of early adenotonsillectomy vs watchful waiting with supportive care demonstrated that 46% of the control group children normalized on PSG (vs 79% of early adenotonsillectomy group) during the 7 month observation period. In addition, it is worth emphasizing that the child with habitual snoring (≥3x/week) but without polysom- nographic evidence of OSA may also experience adverse neurobehav- ioral and neurocognitive outcomes; ongoing studies are examining whether these children may benefit from more aggressive treatment such as adenotonsillectomy. In the majority of cases of pediatric OSA, adenotonsillectomy is the first-line treatment in any child with significant adenotonsillar hyper- trophy, even in the presence of additional risk factors such as obesity. Adenotonsillectomy (or adenotonsillotomy, which is considered a less invasive procedure and may be indicated in some children) in uncom- plicated cases generally (70-90% of children) results in complete reso- lution of symptoms; regrowth of adenoidal tissue after surgical removal occurs in some cases. Groups considered at high risk include young children (<3 years) as well as those with severe OSA documented by PSG, significant clinical sequelae of OSA (e.g., failure to thrive), or associated medical conditions, such as craniofacial syndromes, morbid obesity, and hypotonia. All patients should be reevaluated postopera- tively to determine whether additional evaluation, a repeat PSG, and treatment are required. The American Academy of Sleep Medicine rec- ommends that in high-risk groups (children with obesity, craniofacial anomalies, Down syndrome, or moderate-severe OSA) or in children with continued symptoms of OSA, a follow-up sleep study about 6 weeks after adenotonsillectomy is indicated. Also, a number of studies have suggested that children who are underweight, normal weight, or overweight/obese at baseline all tend to gain weight after adenotonsil- lectomy, and thus clinical vigilance is required during follow-up. It should be noted that in cases of residual OSA postadenotonsil- lectomy, additional diagnostic evaluation to identify other sites of obstruction may be necessary to more specifically tailor treatment. An example of this type of advanced diagnostic tool is drug-induced sleep 

endoscopy (DISE), a powerful method for studying the airway in a sleeping patient in real time. DISE provides direct visualization of the spontaneously breathing airway under light anesthesia and facilitates identification of obstructive lesions. Site of obstruction with potential surgical corrections include lingual (resection) tonsils, tongue base (reductions), turbinate (reduction), and supraglottoplasty. Additional treatment measures that may be appropriate include weight loss, positional therapy (attaching a firm object, such as a tennis ball, to the back of a sleep garment to prevent the child from sleeping in the supine position), and aggressive treatment of additional risk factors when present, such as asthma, seasonal allergies, and gas- troesophageal reflux. Evidence suggests that intranasal corticosteroids and leukotriene inhibitors may be helpful in reducing upper airway inflammation in mild OSA. Other surgical procedures (e.g., uvulopha- ryngopalatoplasty) and maxillofacial surgery (e.g., mandibular distrac- tion osteogenesis) are seldom performed in children. Oral appliances, such as mandibular advancing devices and palatal expanders, may be considered in select cases, particularly in those children with craniofa- cial risk factors as mentioned earlier, and consultation with a pediatric dentist or orthodontist is recommended. Neuromuscular reeducation or repatterning of the oral and facial muscles with exercises to address abnormal tongue position and low upper airway tone (i.e., myofunc- tional therapy) have been shown to be beneficial in addressing pedi- atric OSA as well as alleviating chewing and swallowing problems in children able to cooperate with the behavioral program. Continuous or bilevel positive airway pressure (CPAP or BiPAP) is the most common treatment for OSA in adults and can be used suc- cessfully in children and adolescents. Positive airway pressure (PAP) may be recommended if removing the adenoids and tonsils is not indi- cated, if there is residual disease following adenotonsillectomy, or if there are major risk factors not amenable to surgery (obesity, hypoto- nia). PAP delivers humidihed, warmed air through an interface (mask, nasal pillows) that, under pressure, effectively "splints" the upper airway open. Optimal pressure settings (that abolish or significantly reduce obstructive respiratory events without increasing arousals or central apneas) are determined in the sleep lab during a full-night PAP titration. Careful attention should be paid to education of the child and family, and desensitization protocols should usually be implemented to increase the likelihood of adherence. Efficacy studies at the cur- rent pressure and retitrations should be conducted periodically with Chapter 31 • Sleep Medicine 209 long-term use (at least annually) or in association with significant weight changes or resurgence of SDB symptoms. High-flow nasal can- nula therapy may be another approach. A novel treatment for OSA in adults is hypoglossal nerve stimulation; case series suggest this may be an effective treatment in selected pediatric cases, especially in children with Down syndrome. Parasomnias Parasomnias are episodic nocturnal behaviors that often involve cog- nitive disorientation and autonomic and skeletal muscle disturbance. Parasomnias may be further characterized as occurring primarily dur- ing non-REM sleep (partial arousal parasomnias) or in association with REM sleep, including nightmares, hypnogogic hallucinations, and sleep paralysis; other common parasomnias include sleep-talking and hypnic jerks or "sleep starts." Etiology Partial arousal parasomnias represent a dissociated sleep-wake state, the neurobiology of which remains unclear, although genetic factors and an intrinsic oscillation of subcortical-cortical arousal with sleep have been proposed. These episodic events, which include sleepwalk- ing, sleep terrors, and confusional arousals, are more common in preschool- and school-age children because of the relatively higher percentage of SWS in younger children. Partial arousal parasomnias typically occur when SWS predominates, in the first third of the night. In contrast, nightmares, which are much more common than partial arousal parasomnias but are often confused with them, tend to be con- centrated in the last third of the night, when REM sleep is most promi- nent. Any factor associated with an increase in the relative percentage of SWS (certain medications, previous sleep restriction) may increase the frequency of events in a predisposed child. There appears to be a genetic predisposition for both sleepwalking and sleep terrors. Partial arousal parasomnias may also be difficult to distinguish from noctur- nal seizures. Table 31.6 summarizes similarities and differences among these nocturnal arousal events. Epidemiology Many children sleepwalk on at least one occasion; the lifetime prevalence by age 10 years is 13%. Sleepwalking (somnambu- lism) may persist into adulthood, with the prevalence in adults of Table 31.6 Key Similarities and Differentiating Features Between Non-REM and REM Parasomnias as Well as Nocturnal Seizures Time Sleep stage EEG discharges Scream Autonomic activation Motor activity Awakens Duration (min) Postevent confusion Age Genetics Organic CNS lesion CONFUSIONAL AROUSALS Early SWA - - + - - 0.5-10; more gradual offset + Child + - SLEEP TERRORS Early SWA - ++++ ++++ + - 1-10; more gradual offset + Child + - SLEEPWALKING NIGHTMARES Early-mid Late SWA REM + +++ - 2-30; more gradual offset + Child + ++ + + + 3-20 - Child, young adult Em. Arital A Kalishy. The paraleroe: ephenioray, i a ped eyes mo diagnost poach. in Outest Med. 2010,31.353-370. NOCTURNAL SEIZURES Any Any + + + ++++ + 5-15; abrupt onset and offset + Adolescent, young adult ++++ 

210 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior approximately 4%. The prevalence is approximately 10 times greater in children with a family history of sleepwalking. The peak prev- alence of sleep terrors (or night terrors) is 34% at age 1-5 years, decreasing to 10% by age 7; the age at onset is usually between 4 and 12 years. Because of the common genetic predisposition, the likelihood of developing sleepwalking after age 5 is almost twofold higher in children with a history of sleep terrors. Although sleep terrors can occur at any age from infancy through adulthood, most individuals outgrow sleep terrors by adolescence. Confusional arousals may be accompanied by (and often precede in onset) epi- sodes sleepwalking and sleep terrors; prevalence rates have been estimated at >15% in children age 3-13 years. Clinical Manifestations The partial arousal parasomnas have several features in common. Because they typically occur at the transition out of "deep" sleep or SWS, partial arousal parasomnias have clinical features of both the awake (ambulation, vocalizations) and the sleeping (high arousal threshold, unresponsiveness to environment) states, usually with amnesia for the events. External (noise) or internal (obstruction) factors may trigger events in some individuals. The duration is typi- cally a few minutes (sleep terrors) up to 30-40 minutes (confusional arousals). Sleep terrors are sudden in onset and characteristically involve a high degree of autonomic arousal (tachycardia, diapho- resis, dilated pupils). Confusional arousals typically arise more gradually from sleep, may involve thrashing around, mumbling, and other vocalizations, but usually not displacement from bed, and are often accompanied by slow mentation, disorientation, and confusion on forced arousal from SWS or on waking in the morn- ing. Sleepwalking may be associated with safety concerns (e.g., fall- ing out of windows, wandering outside). The child's avoidance of, or increased agitation with, comforting by parents or prolongation of events by attempts at awakening are also common to all partial arousal parasomnias. Management of partial arousal parasomnias involves some combi- nation of parental education and reassurance, healthy sleep prac- tices, and avoidance of exacerbating factors such as sleep restriction and caffeine. Particularly in the case of sleepwalking, it is important to institute safety precautions such as use of gates in doorways and at the top of staircases, locking of outside doors and windows, and installation of parent notification systems such as bedroom door alarms. Scheduled awakening is a behavioral intervention that involves having the parent wake the child 15-30 minutes before the time of night that the first parasomnia episode typically occurs and 1s most likely to be successful in situations where partial arousal epi- sodes occur on a nightly basis. Pharmacotherapy is rarely necessary but may be indicated in cases of frequent or severe episodes despite nonpharmacologic interventions and absence of treatable underly- ing sleep disorders exacerbating partial arousal parasomnias such as OSA or periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD), high risk of injury, violent behavior, or serious disruption to the family. The primary pharmacologic agents used are potent SWS suppressants, primarily benzodiazepines and tricyclic antidepressants. Sleep-Related Movement Disorders: Restless Legs Syndrome/Periodic Limb Movement Disorder, Restless Sleep Disorder, and Rhythmic Movement Disorder Although some of these sleep disorders share common features (e.g., movements of specific body parts such as extremities vs whole body movements) and pathogenesis (e.g., iron deficiency), each has a dis- tinctive set of diagnostic criteria, epidemiology and clinical manage- ment, and may differ in the degree of disruption to sleep quality and quantity and related daytime consequences. Although most of these sleep-related movement disorders do not require overnight polysomnographic evaluation for diagnosis (PLMD is a notable exception), a videotaped episode by caregivers in the home setting can prove very valuable in helping to differentiate sleep-related movements from nocturnal seizures. Such sleep-related seizures usu- ally arise from the frontal and/or temporal lobes. Ambulatory EEG, in-patient video-EEG monitoring and overnight video PSG with chin and leg EMG recording may be necessary to establish a diagnosis of a sleep-related movement disorder. Restless Legs Syndrome/Periodic Limb Movement Disorder Restless legs syndrome (RLS), also termed Willis-Ekbom disease, is a primary disorder of the CNS sensorimotor network characterized by an almost irresistible urge to move the legs, often accompanied by uncomfortable sensations in the lower extremities. Both the urge to move and the sensations are usually worse at rest and in the evening and are at least partially relieved by movement, including walking, stretching, and rubbing, but only if the motion continues. RLS is a (Table 31.7). PLMD is characterized by periodic, repetitive, brief (0.5-10 seconds), and highly stereotyped limb jerks typically occurring at 20-40 second intervals. These movements occur primarily during sleep, usually occur in the legs, and frequently consist of rhythmic extension of the big toe and dorsiflexion at the ankle. Although there may be clinical complaints of kicking movements in sleep or restless sleep, the diagnosis of periodic limb movements (PLMs) requires overnight PSG to document the characteristic limb move- ments with anterior tibialis EMG leads. However, like adults, chil- dren also show considerable individual night-to-night variability of PLMs, and a single-night PSG may not always reflect the true severity. Etiology RLS has a clear genetic component, with a sixfold to sevenfold increase in prevalence in first-degree relatives of RLS patients. The mode of inheritance is complex, and several genetic loci have been identified (MEIS1, BTBD9, MAP2K5). Low serum iron levels (even without anemia) in both adults and children may be an important etiologic factor for the presence and severity of both RLS symptoms and PLMs. As a marker of decreased iron stores, serum ferritin levels in both children and adults with RLS are frequently low (<50 ug/mL). The postulated underlying mechanism is related to the role of iron as a cofactor in tyrosine hydroxylation, a rate-limiting step in dopamine Table 31.7 Diagnostic Criteria for Restless Legs Syndrome A. An urge to move legs, usually accompanied by or in response to uncomfortable and unpleasant sensations in the legs, characterized by the following: 1. The urge to move the legs begins or worsens during periods of rest or inactivity. 2. The urge to move the legs is partially or totally relieved by 3. The urge to move the legs is worse in the evening or at night than during the day, or occurs only in the evening or at night. B. The symptoms in Criterion A occur at least 3 times per week and have persisted for at least 3 mo. C. The symptoms in Criterion A are accompanied by significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, educational, academic, behavioral, or other important areas of functioning. D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not attributable to another mental disorder or medical condition (e.g., arthritis, leg edema, peripheral ischemia, leg cramps) and are not better explained by a behavioral condition (e.g., positional discomfort, habitual foot tapping). E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiologic effects of a drug or abuse or medication (e.g., akathisia). From American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed, Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2013. p 410. 

synthesis; in turn, dopaminergic dysfunction has been implicated, as in PLMD. Certain medical conditions, including diabetes mel- litus, end-stage renal disease, cancer, idiopathic juvenile arthritis, hypothyroidism, and pregnancy, may also be associated with RLS/ PLMD, as are specific medications (e.g., antidepressants, including tricyclic antidepressants, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as fluoxetine, first-generation sedating antihistamines, and dopamine receptor antagonists, such as Compazine and meto- clopramide), as well as caffeine. Epidemiology Survey studies estimate the prevalence rates of RLS in the pediat- ric population as between 1 and 6%; approximately 2% of 8-17 year olds meet the criteria for "definite" RLS. Prevalence rates of PLMs >5 per hour in clinical populations of children referred for sleep stud- ies range from 5-27%; in survey studies of PLM symptoms, rates are 8-12%. About 40% of adults with RLS have symptoms before age 20 years; 20% report symptoms before age 10. Familial cases usually have a younger age of onset. Several studies in referral populations have found that PLMs occur in as many as 25% of children diagnosed with ADHD. In addition to the urge to move the legs and the sensory component (paresthesia-like, tingling, burning, itching, crawling), most RLS episodes are initiated or exacerbated by rest or inactivity, such as lying in bed to fall asleep or riding in a car for prolonged periods. Children may describe the sensory symptoms as a funny feeling, tickling, hurting, or pain or bugs, spiders, ants, or goosebumps in the legs. Sometimes, the child may draw pins, needles, tiny sand particles, and bugs over his or her legs when asked to depict the symptoms. An "informal" suggested clinical immobilization test (SCIT) (i.e., "If I asked you to lie perfectly still sitting on your bed at bedtime, would you be able to do it?") can be helpful in elicit- ing RLS complaints. A unique feature of RLS is that the timing of symptoms also appears to have a circadian component, in that they often peak in the evening hours. Some children may complain of "growing pains," although this is considered a nonspecific feature. Because RLS symptoms are usually worse in the evening, bedtime struggles and difficulty falling asleep are two of the most common presenting complaints. In contrast to patients with RLS, individuals with PLMs are usually unaware of these movements, but children may complain of morning muscle pain or fatigue; these movements may result in arousals during sleep and consequent significant sleep disruption. Parents of children with RLS/PLMD may report that their child is a restless sleeper and kicks a bed partner. The differential diagnosis includes growing pains, leg cramps, neu- ropathy, arthritis, myalgias, nerve compression ("leg fell asleep"), and dopamine antagonist-associated akathisia. Because of the frequent co-occurrence and overlap in underlying pathophysiology and risk factors for RLS and PLMD, management strategies for both disorders are similar. The clinical decision to treat RLS and PLMs is based on the severity of symptoms, sleep distur- bances, and effect on daytime functioning. An acronym that summa- rizes the management approach for RLS/PLMD in children is AIMS. This includes the following: • Avoidance of drugs/substances which may exacerbate RLS/PLMD (including caffeine, nicotine, alcohol) • Iron supplementation • Muscles: increased physical activity, massage, application of heat/ cold, muscle relaxation and biofeedback • Sleep: regular and adequate sleep Treatment with iron supplementation is indicated if serum fer- ritin is <50 ng/mL. Administration of oral supplements for ferritin levels >75-100 mg/L, at least in adults, are likely ineffective because of low absorption. It should be kept in mind that ferritin is an Chapter 31 • Sleep Medicine 211 acute-phase reactant and thus may be falsely elevated (i.e., normal) in the setting of a concomitant illness. In addition, the ferritin level should be drawn, if possible, in the early morning after avoiding a dinner with a high iron content (e.g., red meat) on the previous eve- ning. A typical iron regimen is ferrous fumarate or sulfate as an oral tablet or liquid: 3-6 mg/kg of elemental iron/day x 3 months with 200 mg vitamin C on an empty stomach while avoiding calcium- containing foods that may slow absorption. Ferritin levels should be repeated after 3 months to assess response and avoid iron overload. If ferritin levels are very low or levels fail to improve after treatment with iron, these children may require referral to hematology for evalu- ation of their iron deficiency (e.g., occult blood loss, malabsorption). Although pediatric data regarding IV iron for RLS/PLMD are largely lacking, there are studies examining the role of IV iron therapy (e.g., ferric carboxymaltose, iron dextran) in the treatment of severe iron deficiency or with iron malabsorption in adults. Potential advantages of IV therapy include rapid response and avoidance of malabsorption/ tolerance/compliance issues. Treatment with pharmacologic agents may be indicated in children with moderate-severe RLS symptoms and PLMD, who did not respond to the previously mentioned measures. Currently, there are no Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved pharmacologic agents for RLS/PLMD in children. Dopaminergic medication is considered the first line of treatment for RLS in adults. Other classes of medications used to treat PLS/PLMD include a-agonists, opiates, benzodiazepines, Restless Sleep Disorder Restless sleep disorder (RSD) has both clinical and PSG features distinct from RLS and PLMD. Clinical descriptors include a com- plaint of "restless sleep" typically reported by a parent, caregiver, or bedpartner; the visible body movements, involving large muscle groups of the whole body, all four limbs, arms, legs, or head during sleep, may be characterized further as frequent repositioning dis- ruption of the bedsheets, falling out of bed and being found in a completely different position compared to the position in which they fell asleep. Diagnostic criteria also include objective documen- tation on videography of increased levels of nocturnal activity and gross body movements with a total movement index during sleep that exceeds five per hour of sleep. RSD has also been found to be associated with low serum iron levels with symptomatic improve- ment following iron supplementation. Sleep-related rhythmic movements, including head banging, body rocking, and head rolling, are characterized by repetitive, stereotyped, and rhythmic movements or behaviors that involve large muscle groups. These behaviors typically occur with the transition to sleep at bedtime, but also at nap times and after nighttime arousals. Children are thought to engage in these behaviors as a means of soothing them- selves to (or back to) sleep. These behaviors are very common, with about two thirds of all infants having some type, typically beginning before 12 months and usually disappearing by preschool age. In most cases, rhythmic movement behaviors are benign, because sleep is not signihcantly disrupted, and associated signincant injury is rare; how- ever, these behaviors can potentially affect the sleep of a family member room-sharing and/or caregivers in nearby sleeping spaces. In addition, caregivers are often concerned about these behaviors as potentially being harmful to the child or possibly indicative of an underlying neu- rologic or neurodevelopmental disorder (e.g., autism). However, these behaviors typically occur in normally developing children and in the majority of cases do not indicate some underlying neurologic or psy- chologic problem. Usually, the most important aspect in management of sleep-related rhythmic movements is reassurance to the family that this behavior is normal, common, benign, and self-limited. Safety may be an important concern, and appropriate measures such as tighten- ing of crib bolts and guardrails on the bed should be taken to prevent injury; noise dampening measures such as moving the bed away from adjoining walls may be helpful. If there are concerns about an associ- ated sleep disorder, seizure disorder, or risk of injury referral to a sleep specialist may be considered. 

212 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Central Disorders of Hypersomnolence: Narcolepsy type 1, Narcolepsy type 2, Idiopathic Hypersomnia Hypersomnia is a clinical term that is used to describe a group of dis- orders characterized by recurrent episodes of EDS, reduced baseline alertness, and/or prolonged nighttime sleep periods that interfere with normal daily functioning (Table 31.8). The many potential causes of EDS can be broadly grouped as "extrinsic" (e.g., secondary to insuf- ficient and/or fragmented sleep) or "intrinsic" (e.g., resulting from an increased need for sleep). Table 31.8 Diagnostic Criteria for Narcolepsy A. Recurrent periods of an irrepressible need to sleep, lapsing into sleep, or napping occurring within the same day. These must have been occurring at least 3 times per week over the past 3 mo. B. The presence of at least one of the following 1. Episodes of cataplexy, defined as either (a) or (b), occurring at least a few times per month: a. In individuals with long-standing disease, brief (seconds to minutes) episodes of sudden bilateral loss of muscle tone with maintained consciousness that are precipitated by laughter or joking. b. In children or individuals within 6 mo of onset, spontaneous grimaces or jaw-opening episodes with tongue thrusting or a global hypotonia, without any obvious emotional triggers. 2. Hypocretin deficiency, as measured using CSF hypocretin-1 immunoreactivity values (less than or equal to one third of values obtained in healthy subjects tested using the same assay, or ≤110 pg/mL). Low CSF levels of hypocretin-1 must not be observed in the context of acute brain injury, inflammation, or infection. 3. Nocturnal sleep polysomnography showing REM sleep latency ≤15 min, or a multiple sleep latency test showing a mean sleep latency ≤ 8 min and two or more sleep-onset REM periods. Specify whether: Narcolepsy without cataplexy but with hypocretin deficiency: polysomnography/multiple sleep latency test are met, but no cataplexy is present (Criterion B1 not met). Narcolepsy with cataplexy but without hypocretin deficiency: In this rare subtype (<5% of narcolepsy cases), Criterion B requirements of cataplexy and positive polysomnography/multiple sleep latency test are met, but CSF hypocretin-1 levels are normal (Criterion B2 not met). Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia, deafness, and narcolepsy: This subtype is caused by exon 21 DNA (cytosine- 5)-methyltransferase-1 mutations and is characterized by late- onset (age 30-40 yr) narcolepsy (with low or intermediate CSF hypocretin-1 levels), deafness, cerebellar ataxia, and eventually dementia. Autosomal dominant narcolepsy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes: levels have been described in rare cases and are associated with a mutation in the myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein gene. Narcolepsy without cataplexy but with hypocretin deficiency: This subtype is for narcolepsy that develops secondary to medical conditions that cause infectious (e.g., Whipple disease, sarcoidosis), traumatic, or tumoral destruction of hypocretin neurons. Mild: Infrequent cataplexy (less than once per week), need for naps only once or twice per day, and less disturbed nocturnal sleep. Moderate: Cataplexy once daily or every few days, disturbed nocturnal sleep and need for multiple naps daily. Severe: Drug-resistant cataplexy with multiple attacks daily, nearly constant sleepiness, and disturbed nocturnal sleep (i.e., movements, insomnia, and vivid dreaming). CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; REM, rapid eye movement. From American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed, Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2013. pp 372-373. Narcolepsy Narcolepsy is a chronic, lifelong CNS disorder, typically presenting in adolescence and early adulthood, characterized by profound daytime sleepiness resulting in significant functional impairment. More than half of patients with narcolepsy also present with cataplexy (type 1 narcolepsy), defined as the sudden, brief, partial, or complete loss of skeletal muscle tone, typically triggered by strong emotion (e.g., laughter, surprise, anger), with retained consciousness. Other symp- toms frequently associated with narcolepsy, including hypnogogic/ hypnopompic (immediately before falling asleep/awakening) visual, auditory, or perceptual hallucinations, and sleep paralysis, may be conceptualized as representing the "intrusion" of REM-related phe- nomena (dream mentation, loss of motor tone) into the waking state. Other REM-related features include observance of eye movements and twitches at sleep onset and vivid dreams. Somewhat paradoxi- cally, increased sleep fragmentation is a common feature. Rapid weight gain, especially near symptom onset, may be observed, and young children with narcolepsy have been reported to develop preco- cious puberty. Etiology The genesis of narcolepsy with cataplexy (type 1) is thought to be related to a specific deficit in the hypothalamic orexin/hypocretin neu- rotransmitter system involving the selective loss of cells that secrete hypocretin/orexin in the lateral hypothalamus. Hypocretin neurons stimulate a range of wake-promoting neurons in the brainstem, hypo- thalamus, and cortex and basal forebrain that produce neurochemicals to sustain the wake state and prevent lapses into sleep. The development of narcolepsy may involve autoimmune mecha- nisms, possibly triggered by streptococcal, influenza virus, H1N1, and other viral infections, likely in combination with a genetic predisposition and environmental factors. A 12-13-fold increase in narcolepsy type 1 cases, especially in children, was reported in parts of Europe in 2009- 2010 following immunization with the AS03 adjuvanted H1N1 influenza vaccine. Human leukocyte antigen testing also shows a strong associa- tion with narcolepsy; the majority of individuals with this antigen (~25% of the general population) do not have narcolepsy, but most (>90%) patients with narcolepsy with cataplexy are HLA-DQB1*0602-positive. Patients with narcolepsy without cataplexy (type 2) are increasingly thought to have a significantly different underlying pathophysiology; they are much less likely to be HLA-DQB1*0602-positive (4-50%), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin levels are normal in most patients. Although most cases of narcolepsy are considered idiopathic (auto- immune), secondary narcolepsy can be caused by lesions to the pos- terior hypothalamus induced by traumatic brain injury, tumor, stroke, and neuroinflammatory processes such as poststreptococcal pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococ- cal infection (PANDAS; see Chapter 229), as well as by neurogenetic diseases such as Prader-Willi syndrome (Chapter 99.7), Niemann- Pick type C (Chapter 106.4), myotonic dystrophy (Chapter 649.6), Angelman syndrome, autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia-deafness- narcolepsy (ADCA-DN), Moebius syndrome, and Norrie disease. Epidemiology Narcolepsy is a rare disorder with a prevalence of approximately 1 in 2000 with equal sex distribution; however, specific countries (eg., Japan) appear to have relatively higher prevalence rates. The risk of developing narcolepsy with cataplexy in a first-degree relative of a nar- coleptic patient is estimated at 1-2%. This represents an increase of 10- 40-fold compared to the general population, but the risk remains very low, reinforcing the likely role for other etiologic factors. Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis The typical onset of symptoms of narcolepsy is in adolescence and early adulthood, although symptoms may initially present in school-age and even younger children. The early manifestations of narcolepsy are often ignored, misinterpreted, or misdiagnosed as other medical, neurologic, or psychiatric conditions, and the appropriate diagnosis is frequently delayed for years. The onset may be abrupt or slowly progressive. 

The most prominent clinical manifestation of narcolepsy is pro- found daytime sleepiness, characterized by both an increased baseline level of daytime drowsiness and the repeated occurrence of sudden and unpredictable sleep episodes. These "sleep attacks" are often described as "irresistible, in that the child or adolescent is unable to stay awake despite considerable effort and occur even in the context of normally stimulating activities (e.g., during meals, in conversation). Very brief (several seconds) sleep attacks may also occur in which the individ- ual may "stare off, appear unresponsive, or continue to engage in an ongoing activity (automatic behavior). EDS may also be manifested by increased nighttime sleep needs and extreme difficulty waking in the morning or after a nap. Cataplexy is considered virtually pathognomonic for narcolepsy but can develop several years after the onset of EDS. Manifestations are trig- gered by strong positive (laughing, joy) or negative (fright, anger, frus- tration) emotions and predominantly include facial slackening, head nodding, jaw dropping, and less often, knees buckling or complete col- lapse with falling to the ground. The cataplectic attacks are typically brief (seconds to minutes), the patient is awake and aware, and episodes are fully reversible, with complete recovery of normal tone when the epi- sode ends. A form of cataplexy unique to children known as cataplec- tic facies is characterized by prolonged tongue protrusion, ptosis, slack jaw, slurred speech, grimacing, and gait instability. Additionally, children may have positive motor phenomenon similar to dyskinesias or motor tics, with repetitive grimacing and tongue thrusting. The cataplectic attacks are typically brief (seconds to minutes) but in children may last for hours or days (status cataplecticus). The differential diagnosis of cataplexy includes syncope, seizures, cataplexy-like episodes in KCNA1 pathologic variants (ataxia-myokymia syndrome), hyperekplexia, hypo and hyperkalemic periodic paralysis syndromes, and pseudocataplexy. Hypnogogic/hypnopompic hallucinations usually involve vivid visual but also auditory and sometimes tactile sensory experiences during transitions between sleep and wakefulness, either at sleep off- set (hypnopompic) or sleep onset (hypnogogic). Sleep paralysis is the inability to move or speak for a few seconds or minutes at sleep onset or offset and often accompanies the hallucinations. Other symptoms associated with narcolepsy include disrupted nocturnal sleep, impaired cognition, inattention and ADHD-like symptoms, and behavioral and mood dysregulation. Several pediatric screening questionnaires for EDS, including the modified Epworth Sleepiness Scale, help to guide the need for further evaluation in clinical practice when faced with the presenting com- plaint of daytime sleepiness. Physical examination should include a detailed neurologic assessment. Overnight PSG and a multiple sleep latency test (MSLT) are strongly recommended components in the evaluation of a patient with profound unexplained daytime sleepiness or suspected narcolepsy. The purpose of the overnight PSG is to evalu- ate for primary sleep disorders (e.g., OSA) that may cause EDS. The MSLT involves a series of five opportunities to nap (20 min long), dur- ing which patients with narcolepsy demonstrate a pathologically short- ened mean sleep-onset latency (≤8 minutes, typically <5 minutes) as well as at least two periods of REM sleep occurring immediately after sleep onset. Alternatively, a diagnosis of type 1 narcolepsy can be made by findings of low CSF hypocretin-1 concentration (typically ≤110 pg/ mL) with a standardized assay. In general, the management of pediatric narcolepsy is best done in con- junction with a pediatric sleep specialist. An individualized narcolepsy treatment plan usually involves education, good sleep hygiene, behav- ioral changes, and medication. Scheduled naps during the day are often helpful. Wake-promoting medications such as modafinil or armodafinil may be prescribed to control the EDS, although these are not approved for use in children by the U.S. FDA, and potential side effects include rare reports of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and reduced efficacy of hormone-based contraceptives. Psychostimulants are approved for ADHD in children and can be used for EDS; side effects include appetite suppression, mood lability, and cardiovascular effects. Antidepressants (serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, venlafaxine) Chapter 31 • Sleep Medicine 213 may be used to reduce cataplexy. Sodium oxybate, which is approved for use in children, is a unique drug that appears to have a positive impact on daytime sleepiness, cataplexy, and nocturnal sleep disruption; reported side effects include dizziness, weight loss, enuresis, exacerba- tion of OSA, depression, and risk of respiratory depression, especially when combined with CNS depressants, including alcohol. Pitolisant has a novel mechanism as a histamine (H3) receptor agonist and has been shown to improve cataplexy and EDS in adult patients with narcolepsy. Preliminary results in children have been encouraging. Solriamfetol, a norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitor, is another alertness- enhancing drug recently approved in adults. The goal for the child should be to allow the fullest possible return of normal functioning in school, at home, and in social situations. Idiopathic Hypersomnia Idiopathic hypersomnia (IH) is a central sleep disorder, presenting in adolescence and young adults, characterized by chronic and EDS, but without cataplexy or REM sleep intrusions. Patients typically present with prolonged nocturnal sleep duration and severe sleep inertia, making it difficult to arouse from nocturnal sleep or day- time naps. Patients often report transient periods of confusion and "sleep drunkenness" on awakening, sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic hallucinations. Unlike patients with narcolepsy, daytime naps tend to be long (more than 1 hour) and unrefreshing. The prevalence in the general population is not known because of challenges with diagnos- tic evaluation, but is estimated to be approximately 20-50 cases per million. The pathogenesis also is not well understood; however, some cases were documented to be precipitated by viral illnesses, suggest- ing a possible autoimmune process. A diagnosis of IH requires daily periods of irrepressible need to sleep or daytime lapses into sleep for at least 3 months, absence of cataplexy, and exclusion of other causes including insufficient sleep. Diagnosis is made by PSG followed by an MSLT showing mean sleep latency of <8 minutes and less than two sleep-onset REM periods (SOREMPs) on MSLT or no SOREMPs if the REM sleep latency preceding PSG is 15 minutes or less. When the mean sleep latency on the MSLT is >8 minutes, a 24-hour PSG or 2-week actigraphy to ensure a total 24-hour sleep time ≥660 minutes is needed. Treatment is mostly derived from experience with medi- cations to treat EDS in narcolepsy. Wakeful promoting medications such as modafinil, armodafinil, methylphenidate, amphetamines, and oxybate are treatment options. Behavior modifications such as sched- uled naps are not generally helpful. Kleine-Levin syndrome (KLS) may mimic IH and manifests with recurrent episodes of hypersomnia (Table 31.9). KLS may resolve over- time; some reports support the use of parenteral steroids during an Table 31.9 Diagnostic Criteria for Kleine-Levin Syndrome CRITERIA A-E MUST BE MET A. The patient experiences at least two recurrent episodes of excessive sleepiness and sleep duration, each persisting for 2 days to 5 weeks. B. Episodes recur usually more than once a year and at least once C. The patient has normal alertness, cognitive function, behavior, D. The patient must demonstrate at least one of the following during episodes: E. Cognitive dysfunction. F. Altered perception. G. Eating disorder (anorexia or hyperphagia). H. Disinhibited behavior (such as hypersexuality). I. The hypersomnolence and related symptoms are not better explained by another sleep disorder, other medical, neurologic, or psychiatric disorder (especially bipolar disorder), or use of drugs or medications. From Afolabi-Brown O, Mason I| TBA. Kleine-Levin syndrome. Pediatr Respir Rev. 2018;25:9-13, Table 1, p 10. 

214 Part I| • Growth, Development, and Behavior Delayed Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (DSWPD), a circadian rhythm disorder, involves a significant, persistent, and intractable phase shift in sleep-wake schedule (later sleep onset and wake time) that con- flicts with the individual's normal school, work, and lifestyle demands. DSWPD may occur at any age but is most common in adolescents and young adults. Etiology Individuals with DSPD may start out as "night owls"; that is, they have an underlying biologic predisposition/circadian-based "eve- ningness" chronotype that results in a propensity for staying up relatively late at night and sleeping until late in the morning or early afternoon, and in extreme cases, a complete "day-night reversal." Although these patients struggle to get up in time for school or work, they usually revert to their preferred sleep schedule on week- ends, holidays, and summer vacations. The underlying pathophysi- govern the timing of the sleep period. Epidemiology Studies indicate that the prevalence of DSWPD may be as high as 7-16% in adolescents and young adults. The most common clinical presentation of DSWPD is sleep- initiation insomnia when the individual attempts to fall asleep at a "socially acceptable" desired bedtime and experiences very delayed sleep onset (often after 1-2 AM), accompanied by daytime sleepiness. Patients may also report extreme difficulty arising in the morning even for desired activities, with pronounced confusion on waking (sleep inertia), and caregivers often complain of the need for multiple reminders or even the complete failure to awaken the adolescent in time to attend school. Sleep maintenance is gener- ally not problematic, and no sleep-onset insomnia is experienced if bedtime coincides with the preferred sleep-onset time. Patients may also develop "secondary" psychophysiologic insomnia as a result of spending prolonged time in bed attempting to fall asleep. School tardiness and frequent absenteeism with a decline in academic performance often occur, and there may be school-related disci- plinary action (i.e., suspension, truancy label) or a need to justify home-based schooling/tutoring that motivate families to seek help. It is important to recognize that there may also be issues related to family dynamics and comorbid anxiety, depression, or learning disabilities that provide a motivation to avoid attending school and perpetuate the sleep schedule problems, as well as reducing adher- ence to interventions. The treatment of DSWPD usually has three components, all directed toward the goals of shifting the sleep-wake schedule to an earlier, more desirable time and maintaining the new schedule. The initial step involves shifting the sleep-wake schedule to the desired earlier times, usually with gradual (i.e., in 15-30 minute increments every few days) alternating advancement of rise time in the morning and bedtime in the evening. More significant phase delays (i.e., larger difference between current sleep onset and desired bedtime) may require chronotherapy, which involves delaying bedtime and wake time by 2-3 hours every 24 hours "forward around the clock" until the target bedtime is reached. Because melatonin secretion is highly sensitive to light, exposure to light in the morning (either natu- ral light or a "light box," which typically produces light at around 10,000 lux) and avoidance of evening light exposure (especially from screens emitting predominantly blue light, such as computers and laptops) are often beneficial. Exogenous oral melatonin supple- mentation may also be used; larger, mildly sedating doses (5 mg) are typically given 30 minutes before bedtime, but some studies have suggested that physiologic doses of oral melatonin (0.3-0.5 mg) administered in the afternoon or early evening (5-7 hours before the habitual sleep-onset time or 2 hours before the desired bedtime) may be more effective in advancing the sleep phase. SLEEP HEALTH SUPERVISION It is especially important for pediatricians to screen for and rec- ognize sleep disorders in children and adolescents during routine healthcare encounters. The well-child visit is an opportunity to edu- cate parents about normal sleep and to teach strategies to prevent sleep problems from developing (primary prevention) or becoming chronic, if problems already exist (secondary prevention). Develop- mentally appropriate screening for sleep disturbances should take place in the context of every well-child visit and should include a range of potential sleep problems; Table 31.10 outlines a simple sleep screening algorithm called the "BEARS." Because parents may not always be aware of sleep problems, especially in older children and adolescents, it is also important to question the child directly about sleep concerns. The recognition and evaluation of sleep problems in children require both an understanding of the association between sleep disturbances and daytime consequences (e.g., irritability, inat- tention, poor impulse control) knowledge of risk factors for the wide variety of sleep disorders (e.g., obesity, positive family history, medications), and familiarity with the developmentally appropriate differential diagnoses of common presenting sleep complaints (dif- ficulty initiating and maintaining sleep, episodic nocturnal events). An assessment of sleep patterns and possible sleep problems should be part of the initial evaluation of every child presenting with behavioral or academic problems, especially ADHD. Effective preventive measures include educating parents of newborns about normal sleep amounts and patterns. The ability to regulate sleep begins to develop in the first 8-12 weeks of life. Thus it is important to recommend that parents put their 2-4 month old infants to bed "drowsy but awake" if they want to avoid dependence on parental presence at sleep onset and foster the infant's ability to self-soothe. Other important sleep issues include discussing the importance of regular bedtimes, bedtime routines, and transitional objects for toddlers, and providing parents and children with basic information about healthy sleep practices, recom- mended sleep amounts at different ages, and signs that a child is not get- ting sufficient sleep. The cultural and family context within which sleep problems in children occur should be considered. For example, bed-sharing of infants and parents is a common and accepted practice in many racial/ethnic groups, and these families may not share the goal of independent self-soothing in young infants. Anticipatory guidance needs to balance cultural awareness with the critical importance of "safe sleep" conditions in sudden infant death syndrome preven- tion (i.e., sleeping in the supine position, avoidance of bed-sharing but encouragement of room-sharing in the first year of life) (see Chapter 423). On the other hand, the institution of cosleeping by parents as an attempt to address a child's underlying sleep problem (so-called reactive cosleeping), rather than as a conscious family decision, is likely to yield only a temporary respite from the prob- lem and may set the stage for more significant sleep issues. EVALUATION OF PEDIATRIC SLEEP PROBLEMS The clinical evaluation of a child presenting with a sleep problem involves obtaining a careful medical history to assess for potential medical causes of sleep disturbances, such as allergies, concomitant medications, and acute or chronic pain conditions. A developmental history is important because of the increased risk of sleep problems in children with neurodevelopmental disorders. Assessment of the child's current level of functioning (school, home) is a key part of evaluating possible mood, behavioral, and neurocognitive sequelae of sleep problems. Current sleep patterns, including the usual sleep duration and sleep-wake schedule, are often best assessed with a sleep diary, in which a parent (or adolescent) records daily sleep behaviors for an extended period (1-2 weeks). A review of sleep habits, such as bedtime routines, daily caffeine intake, and the 

Chapter 31 • Sleep Medicine 215 Table 31.10 BEARS Sleep Screening Algorithm The BEARS instrument is divided into five major sleep domains, providing a comprehensive screen for the major sleep disorders affecting children 2-18yr old. Each sleep domain has a set of age-appropriate "trigger questions" for use in the clinical interview. B = Bedtime problems E = Excessive daytime sleepiness A = Awakenings during the night R = Regularity and duration of sleep S = Snoring DEVELOPMENTALLY APPROPRIATE TRIGGER QUESTIONS TODDLER, PRESCHOOL (2-5YR) SCHOOL-AGE (6-12 YR) 1. Bedtime problems Does your child have any problems Does your child have any problems at going to bed? Falling asleep? bedtime? (P) Do you any problems going to bed? (C) 2. Excessive daytime Does your child seem overtired or sleepiness sleepy a lot during the day? Does your child still take naps? Does your child have difficulty waking in the morning, seem sleepy during the day, or take naps? (P) Do you feel tired a lot? (C) 3. Awakenings during Does your child wake up a lot at the night night? Does your child seem to wake up a lot at night? Any sleepwalking or nightmares? (P) Do you wake up a lot at night? Do you have trouble getting back to sleep? (C) 4. Regularity and Does your child have a regular duration of sleep bedtime and wake time? What are they? What tipedoes ol days dekends Do you think your child is getting enough sleep? (P) 5. Snoring Does your child snore a lot or have difficulty breathing at night? C, Child; P, parent. Does your child have loud or nightly snoring or any breathing difficulties at night? (P) ADOLESCENT (13-18 YR) Do you have etime lems falling Do you feel sleepy a lot during the day? In school? While driving? (C) Do you wake up a lot at night? Do you have trouble getting back to sleep? (C) Weekends? How much sleep do you usually get? (C) Does your teenager snore loudly or nightly? (P) sleeping environment (e.g., temperature, noise level), may reveal environmental factors that contribute to the sleep problems. Noc- turnal symptoms that may be indicative of a medically based sleep or PLes Such as OSe l, red enri ki ching go again, sweating) elicited. Home video recording may be helpful in the evaluation of potential parasomnia episodes and the assessment of snoring and increased work of breathing in children with OSA. An overnight sleep study (PSG) is not routinely warranted in the evaluation of a child with sleep problems unless there are symptoms suggestive of OSA or PLMs, unusual features of episodic nocturnal events, or unexplained daytime sleepiness. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders PART VI Chapter 73 Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 73.1 Composition of Body Fluids Larry A. Greenbaum TOTAL BODY WATER Total body water (TBW) as a percentage of body weight varies with age (Fig. 73.1). The fetus has very high TBW, which gradually decreases to approximately 75% of birthweight for a term infant. Premature infants have higher TBW than term infants. During the first year of life, TBW decreases to approximately 60% of body weight and remains at this level until puberty. At puberty, the fat content of females increases more than that in males, who acquire more muscle mass than females. Because fat has very low water content and muscle has high water content, by the end of puberty TBW in males remains at 60%, but TBW in females decreases to approximately 50% of body weight. The high fat content in over- weight children causes a decrease in TBW as a percentage of body weight. During dehydration, TBW decreases and thus is a smaller percentage of body weight. FLUID COMPARTMENTS TBW is divided between two main compartments: intracellular fluid (ICF) and extracellular fluid (ECF). In the fetus and new - born, the ECF volume is larger than the IC volume (see Fig. 73.1). The normal postnatal diuresis causes an immediate decrease in the 100 90 80- % Body Weight 70 60 50 40 30 20 - 10 0 Total body water (TBW) lIntracellular fluid (ICF)! 1==-0 ECF volume. This is followed by continued expansion of the ICF volume, which results from cellular growth. By 1 year of age, the ratio of ICF volume to ECF volume approaches adult levels. The ECF volume is approximately 20-25% of body weight, and the ICF volume is approximately 30-40% of body weight, close to twice the ECF volume (Fig. 73.2). With puberty, the increased muscle mass of males causes them to have a higher IC volume than females. There is no significant difference in the ECF volume between postpubertal females and males. The ECF is further divided into the plasma water and the inter- stitial fluid (see Fig. 73.2). The plasma water is 5% of body weight. The blood volume, given a hematocrit of 40%, is usually 8% of body weight, although it is higher in newborns and young infants; in premature newborns it is approximately 10% of body weight. The volume of plasma water can be altered by pathologic conditions, including dehydration, anemia, polycythemia, heart failure, abnor- mal plasma osmolality, and hypoalbuminemia. The interstitial fluid, normally 15% of body weight, can increase dramatically in diseases associated with edema, such as heart failure, protein-losing enter- opathy, liver failure, nephrotic syndrome, and sepsis. An increase in interstitial fluid also occurs in patients with ascites or pleural There is a delicate equilibrium between the intravascular fluid and the interstitial fluid. The balance between hydrostatic and Intracellular (30-40%) Extracellular fluid (ECF) 2468 6 12 3 6 9 12 is Adult Birth Months Years Age Fig. 73.1 Total body water, intracellular fluid, and extracellular fluid as a percentage of body weight as a function of age. (From Winters RW. Water and electrolyte regulation. In: Winters RW, ed. The Body Fluids in Pediatrics. Little, Brown; 1973.) Interstitial (15%) Extracellular (20-25%) Plasma (5%) Fig. 73.2 Compartments of total body water, expressed as percent- ages of body weight, in an older child or adult. 485 

486 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders oncotic forces regulates the intravascular volume, which is criti- cal for proper tissue perfusion. The intravascular fluid has a higher concentration of albumin than the interstitial fluid, and the conse- quent oncotic force draws water into the intravascular space. The maintenance of this gradient depends on the limited permeability of albumin across the capillaries. The hydrostatic pressure of the intravascular space, which is caused by the pumping action of the heart, drives fluid out of the intravascular space. These forces favor movement into the interstitial space at the arterial ends of the cap- illaries. The decreased hydrostatic forces and increased oncotic forces, which result from the dilutional increase in albumin concen- tration, cause movement of fluid into the venous ends of the capil- laries. Overall, there is usually a net movement of fluid out of the intravascular space to the interstitial space, but this fluid is returned to the circulation via the lymphatics. An imbalance in these forces may cause expansion of the inter- stitial volume at the expense of the intravascular volume. In chil- dren with hypoalbuminemia, the decreased oncotic pressure of the intravascular fluid contributes to the development of edema. Loss of fluid from the intravascular space may compromise the intravas- cular volume, placing the child at risk for inadequate blood flow to vital organs. This is especially likely in diseases in which capil- lary leak occurs because the loss of albumin from the intravascular space is associated with an increase in the albumin concentration in the interstitial space, further compromising the oncotic forces that normally maintain intravascular volume. In contrast, with heart failure, there is an increase in venous hydrostatic pressure from expansion of the intravascular volume, which is caused by impaired pumping by the heart, and the increase in venous pres- sure causes fluid to move from the intravascular space to the inter- stitial space. Expansion of the intravascular volume and increased intravascular pressure also cause the edema that occurs with acute glomerulonephritis. ELECTROLYTE COMPOSITION The composition of the solutes in the ICF and ECF are very differ- ent (Fig. 73.3). Sodium (Na+) and chloride (CI) are the dominant cation and anion, respectively, in ECF. The sodium and chloride concentrations ([Na*], [Cl-]) in the ICF are much lower. Potassium (Kt) is the most abundant cation in the ICF, and its concentration PLASMA Cations Anions INTRACELLULAR Cations Anions Na+ (140) CI - (104) K+ (140) Phos- (107) HCOz- (24) Prot- (40) Prot - (14) K+ (4) Na+ (13) Ca+ (2.5) Other (6) НС03- (10) Mg + (1.1) Phos- (2) Mg + (7) CI - (3) Fig. 73.3 Concentrations of the major cations and anions in the intra- cellular space and the plasma, expressed in mEq/L. ([K*]) within the cells is approximately 30 times higher than in the ECF. Proteins, organic anions, and phosphate are the most plenti- ful anions in the ICF. The dissimilarity between the anions in the ICF and the ECF is largely determined by the presence of intra- cellular molecules that do not cross the cell membrane, the bar- rier separating the ECF and the ICF. In contrast, the difference in the distribution of cations (Nat and K*) relies on activity of the Nat,K+-adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) pump and membrane ion channels. The difference in the electrolyte compositions of the ECF and the ICF has important ramifications in the evaluation and treatment of electrolyte disorders. Serum concentrations of electrolytes ([Na*], [K*], and [CI]) do not always reflect total body content. Intracellu- lar [K*] is much higher than the serum concentration. A shift of K+ from the intracellular space (ICS) can maintain a normal or even an elevated serum [K*] despite massive losses of K+ from the ICS. This effect is seen in diabetic ketoacidosis, in which significant K+ depletion is masked by transmembrane shift of K+ from the ICF to the ECF. Therefore, for K* and phosphorus, electrolytes with a high intracellular concentration, serum level may not reflect total body content. Similarly, the serum calcium concentration ([Ca?*]) does not reflect total body content of Ca't, which is largely contained in bone (see Chapter 69). OSMOLALITY The ICF and the ECF are in osmotic equilibrium because the cell membrane is permeable to water. If the osmolality in one compart- ment changes, then water movement leads to a rapid equalization of osmolality, with a shift of water between the ICS and extracellu- lar space (ECS). Clinically, the primary process is usually a change in the osmolality of the ECF, with resultant shift of water into the ICF if ECr osmolality decreases, or vice versa if ECF osmolality increases. The ECF osmolality can be determined and usually equals ICF osmolality. Plasma osmolality, normally 285-295 mOsm/kg, is measured by the degree of freezing-point depression. The plasma osmolality can also be estimated by a calculation based on the fol- lowing formula: Osmolality = 2x Nal + [glucose /18 + BUNJ /2.8 Glucose and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) are reported in mg/dL. Division of these values by 18 and 2.8, respectively, converts the units into mmol/L. Multiplication of the [Nat] value by 2 accounts for its accompanying anions, principally Cl- and bicarbonate. The calculated osmolality is usually slightly lower than measured osmolality. Urea is not confined to the ECS because it readily crosses the cell membrane, and its intracellular concentration approximately equals its extracellular concentration. Whereas an elevated [Na+] causes a shift of water from the ICS, with uremia there is no osmo- lar gradient between the two compartments and consequently no movement of water. The only exception is during hemodialysis, when the decrease in extracellular urea is so rapid that intracel- lular urea does not have time to equilibrate. Disequilibrium syn- drome during hemodialysis may result in a shift of water into brain cells and lead to severe symptoms. Ethanol, because it freely crosses cell membranes, is another ineffective osmole. Hence, the effective osmolality can be calculated as follows: Effective osmolality = 2 x Na) + (glucose) /18 The effective osmolality determines the osmotic force that is mediat- ing the shift of water between the ECF and the ICF. 

Hyperglycemia causes an increase in the plasma osmolality because it is not in equilibrium with the ICS. During hypergly- cemia, there is shift of water from the ICS to the ECS. This shift causes dilution of the Na* in the ECS, causing hyponatremia despite elevated plasma osmolality. The magnitude of this effect can be cal- culated as follows: Na corrected = Nal measured + 1.6 X (glucose) - 100 mg / dL) /100 where [Na] measured = Nat concentration measured by the clinical laboratory and [Nalcorrected = corrected Na+ concentration (the Na+ concentration if the glucose concentration were normal and its accom- reliable indicator of the ratio of total body Na+ to TBW, the usual deter- minant of the [Na+]. Normally, measured osmolality and calculated osmolality are within 10 mOsm/kg. However, there are some clinical situations in which this difference does not occur. The presence of unmeasured osmoles causes measured osmolality to be significantly elevated in comparison with the calculated osmolality. An osmolal gap is present when the difference between measured osmolality exceeds calculated osmolality by >10 mOsm/kg. Examples of unmeasured osmoles include ethanol, ethylene glycol, methanol, sucrose, sorbitol, and mannitol. These sub- stances increase measured osmolality but are not part of the equation for calculating osmolality. The presence of an osmolal gap is a clinical clue to the presence of unmeasured osmoles and may be diagnostically useful when there is clinical suspicion of poisoning with methanol or ethylene glycol. Pseudohyponatremia is a second situation in which there is dis- cordance between measured osmolality and calculated osmolality. Lipids and proteins are the solids of the serum. In patients with elevated serum lipids or proteins, the water content of the serum decreases because water is displaced by the larger amounts of sol- ids. Some instruments measure [Na+] by determining the amount of Nat per liter of serum, including the solid component. When the solid component increases, there is a decrease in [Na+] per liter of serum, despite a normal concentration when based on the amount of Nat per liter of serum water. It is the concentration of Nat in serum water that is physiologically relevant. A similar prob- lem occurs when using instruments that require dilution of the sample before measurement of Na+ (indirect potentiometry). In both situations, the plasma osmolality is normal despite the pres- ence of pseudohyponatremia, because the method for measuring osmolality is not appreciably influenced by the percentage of serum that is composed of lipids and proteins. Pseudohyponatremia is diagnosed by the finding of a normal measured plasma osmolality despite hyponatremia. This laboratory artifact does not occur if the [Nat] in water is measured directly with an ion-specific electrode, as with arterial blood gas (ABG) analyzers. Pseudohypernatremia may occur in patients with very low levels of serum proteins by a When there are no unmeasured osmoles and pseudohyponatre- mia is not a concern, the calculated osmolality provides an accurate estimate of the plasma osmolality. Measurement of plasma osmo- lality is useful for detecting or monitoring unmeasured osmoles and confirming the presence of true hyponatremia. Whereas many children with high plasma osmolality are dehydrated-as seen with hypernatremic dehydration or diabetic ketoacidosis-high osmolal- ity does not always equate with dehydration. A child with salt poison- ing or uremia has an elevated plasma osmolality but may be volume POINT-OF-CARE TESTING Point-of-care (POC) testing offers a number of advantages, includ- ing rapid turnaround and usually smaller blood sample volume Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 487 required. POC devices may provide more accurate results in certain situations, such as pseudohyponatremia (see earlier) and pseudo- hyperkalemia (see Chapter 73.4). However, the agreement between POC and the laboratory is variable, and thus caution is needed when interpreting results. Because of bias, POC and laboratory results should not be used on an alternating basis when following critical trends (e.g., during correction of hypernatremia or hypona- tremia; see Chapter 73.3). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 73.2 Regulation of Osmolality and Volume Larry A. Greenbaum The regulation of plasma osmolality and the intravascular vol- ume is controlled by independent systems for water balance, which determines osmolality, and sodium balance, which determines vol- ume status. Maintenance of normal osmolality depends on control of water balance. Control of volume status depends on regulation of sodium balance. When present, volume depletion takes precedence over regulation of osmolality, and retention of water contributes to the maintenance of intravascular volume. REGULATION OF OSMOLALITY The plasma osmolality is tightly regulated and maintained at 285-295 mOsm/kg. Modification of water intake and excretion maintains nor- mal plasma osmolality. In the steady state, the combination of water intake and water produced by the body from oxidation balances water losses from the skin, lungs, urine, and gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Only water intake and urinary losses can be regulated. Osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus sense plasma osmolality (see Chapter 594). An elevated effective osmolality leads to secre- tion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) by neurons in the supra- optic and paraventricular nuclei in the hypothalamus. The axons of these neurons terminate in the posterior pituitary. Circulating ADH binds to its Va receptors in the collecting duct cells of the kidney and causes insertion of water channels (aquaporin-2) into the renal collecting duct cells. This produces increased perme- ability to water, permitting resorption of water into the hypertonic renal medulla. Urine concentration increases and water excretion decreases. Urinary water losses cannot be eliminated because there is obligatory excretion of urinary solutes, such as urea and sodium. The regulation of ADH secretion is tightly linked to plasma osmo- lality, responses being detectable with a 1% change in osmolality. ADH secretion virtually disappears when plasma osmolality is low, allowing excretion of maximally dilute urine. The resulting loss of free water (i.e., water without Na*) corrects plasma osmolality. ADH secretion is not an all-or-nothing response; there is a graded adjustment as the osmolality changes. Water intake is regulated by hypothalamic osmoreceptors, which stimulate thirst when the serum osmolality increases. Thirst occurs with a small increase in the serum osmolality. Control of osmolality is subordinate to maintenance of an adequate intravascular volume. When volume depletion is present, both ADH secretion and thirst are stimulated, regardless of the plasma osmolality. The sensation of thirst requires moderate volume depletion but only a 1-2% change in the plasma osmolality. A number of conditions can limit the kidney's ability to excrete adequate water to correct low plasma osmolality. In the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), ADH continues to be produced despite a low plasma osmolality (see Chapters 73.3 The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) affects the kidney's ability to eliminate water. With a decrease in the GFR, less water is delivered to 

488 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders ney's ability to respond to an excess of water. le in in he no it get in con be acted. The minimum urine osmolality is approximately 30-50 mOsm/ kg. This places an upper limit on the kidney's ability to excrete water; sufficient solute must be present to permit water loss. Massive water intoxication may exceed this limit, whereas a lesser amount of water is necessary in the child with a diet that has very little solute. This can produce severe hyponatremia in children who receive little salt and have minimal urea production as a result of inadequate pro- tein intake. Volume depletion is an extremely important cause of decreased water loss by the kidney despite a low plasma osmolality. This "appropriate" secretion of ADH occurs because volume deple- tion takes precedence over the osmolality in the regulation of ADH. The maximum urine osmolality is approximately 1,200 mOsm/ kg. The obligatory solute losses dictate the minimum volume of urine that must be produced, even when maximally concentrated. Obligatory water losses increase in patients with high salt intake or high urea losses, as may occur after relief of a urinary obstruction or during recovery from acute kidney injury. An increase in uri- nary solute and thus water losses occurs with an osmotic diuresis, which results classically from glycosuria in diabetes mellitus as well as iatrogenically after mannitol administration. There are develop- mental changes in the kidney's ability to concentrate the urine. The maximum urine osmolality in a newborn, especially a premature newborn, is less than that in an older infant or child. This limits the ability to conserve water and makes such a patient more vulnerable to hypernatremic dehydration. Very high fluid intake, as seen with psychogenic polydipsia, can dilute the high osmolality in the renal medulla, which is necessary for maximal urinary concentration. If fluid intake is restricted in patients with this condition, the kid- ney's ability to concentrate the urine may be somewhat impaired, although this defect corrects after a few days without polydipsia. This may also occur during the initial treatment of central diabetes insipidus with desmopressin acetate; the renal medulla takes time to achieve its normal maximum osmolality. REGULATION OF VOLUME An appropriate intravascular volume is critical for survival; both vol- ume depletion and volume overload may cause significant morbidity and mortality. Because sodium is the principal extracellular cation and is restricted to the ECE, adequate body sodium is necessary for main- tenance of intravascular volume. The principal extracellular anion, Cl, is also necessary, but for simplicity, Na+ balance is considered the main regulator of volume status because body content of sodium and that of chloride usually change proportionally, given the need for equal num- bers of cations and anions. In some situations, Cl depletion is consid- ered the dominant derangement causing volume depletion (metabolic alkalosis with volume depletion). The kidney determines sodium balance because there is little homeostatic control of sodium intake, even though salt craving does occasionally occur, typically in children with chronic renal salt loss. The kidney regulates Na* balance by altering the percent- age of filtered Nat that is resorbed along the nephron. Normally, the kidney excretes <1% of the Nat filtered at the glomerulus. In the absence of disease, extrarenal losses and urinary output match intake, with the kidney having the capacity to adapt to large varia- tions in sodium intake. When necessary, urinary sodium excre- tion can be reduced to virtually undetectable levels or increased dramatically. The most important determinant of renal Nat excretion is the vol- ume status of the child; it is the effective intravascular volume that influences urinary Nat excretion. The effective intravascular volume is the volume status that is sensed by the body's regulatory mechanisms. Heart failure is a state of volume overload, but the effective intravas- cular volume is low because poor cardiac function prevents adequate perfusion of the kidneys and other organs. This explains the avid renal Nat retention often present in patients with heart failure. The renin-angiotensin system is an important regulator of renal Nat excretion. The juxtaglomerular apparatus produces renin in response to decreased effective intravascular volume. Specific stim- uli for renin release are decreased perfusion pressure in the afferent arteriole of the glomerulus, decreased delivery of sodium to the dis- tal nephron, and ß,-adrenergic agonists, which increase in response to intravascular volume depletion. Renin, a proteolytic enzyme, cleaves angiotensinogen, producing angiotensin I. Angiotensin- converting enzyme (ACE) converts angiotensin I into angiotensin II. The actions of angiotensin II include direct stimulation of the proximal tubule to increase sodium resorption and stimulation of the adrenal gland to increase aldosterone secretion. Through its actions in the distal nephron-specifically, the late distal convo- luted tubule and the collecting duct —aldosterone increases sodium resorption. Aldosterone also stimulates potassium excretion, increasing urinary losses. Along with decreasing urinary loss of sodium, angiotensin II acts as a vasoconstrictor, which helps main- tain adequate blood pressure in the presence of volume depletion. Volume expansion stimulates the synthesis of atrial natriuretic pep- tide (ANP), which is produced by the atria in response to atrial wall distention. Along with increasing the GFR, ANP inhibits Na* resorp- tion in the medullary portion of the collecting duct, facilitating an increase in urinary Nat excretion. Volume overload occurs when Nat intake exceeds output. Chil- dren with kidney failure have impaired ability to excrete Na*. The GFR is low at birth, limiting a newborn's ability to excrete a Na+ load. In other situations, there is a loss of the appropriate regulation of renal Na* excretion. This loss of regulation occurs in patients with excessive aldosterone, as seen in primary hyperaldosteron- ism or renal artery stenosis, where excess renin production leads to high aldosterone levels. In acute glomerulonephritis, even without significantly reduced GFR, the normal intrarenal mechanisms that regulate Nat excretion malfunction, causing excessive renal reten- tion of Nat and volume overload. Renal retention of Nat occurs during volume depletion, but this appropriate response causes the severe excess in total body Nat that is present in heart failure, liver failure, nephrotic syndrome, and other causes of hypoalbuminemia. In these diseases, the effective intravas- cular volume is decreased, causing the kidney and the various regu- latory systems to respond, leading to renal Na* retention and edema Volume depletion usually occurs when Na* losses exceed intake. The most common etiology in children is gastroenteritis. Exces- sive losses of sodium may also occur from the skin in children with burns, in sweat from patients with cystic fibrosis, or after vigorous exercise. Inadequate intake of Nat is uncommon except in neglect, in famine, or with an inappropriate choice of liquid diet in a child who cannot take solids. Urinary Nat wasting may occur in a range of renal diseases, from renal dysplasia to tubular disorders, such as Bartter syndrome. The neonate, especially if premature, has a mild impairment in the ability to conserve Nat. Iatrogenic renal Na+ wasting takes place during diuretic therapy. Renal Nat loss occurs as a result of derangement in the normal regulatory systems. An absence of aldosterone, seen most frequently in children with con- genital adrenal hyperplasia caused by 21-hydroxylase deficiency, causes sodium wasting (see Chapter 616). Isolated disorders of water balance can affect volume status and Na* balance. Because the cell membrane is permeable to water, changes in TBW influence both the extracellular volume and the intracellular vol- ume. In isolated water loss, as occurs in diabetes insipidus, the impact is greater on the ICS because it has a greater volume than the ECS. Thus, compared with other types of dehydration, hypernatremic dehy- dration has less impact on plasma volume; most of the fluid loss comes from the ICS. Yet, significant water loss eventually affects intravascular volume and will stimulate renal Nat retention, even if total body Na+ content is normal. Similarly, with acute water intoxication or SIADH, there is an excess of TBW, but most is in the ICS. However, there is some effect on the intravascular volume, which causes renal excretion 

Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 489 of Nat. Children with SIADH or water intoxication have high urine Nat concentration despite hyponatremia. This finding reinforces the concept of independent control systems for water and Nat, but the 2 systems interact when pathophysiologic processes dictate, and control of effective intravascular volume always takes precedence over control of osmolality. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 73.3 Sodium Larry A. Greenbaum SODIUM METABOLISM Body Content and Physiologic Function Sodium is the dominant cation of the ECF (see Fig. 73.3), and it is the principal determinant of extracellular osmolality. Na* is therefore necessary for the maintenance of intravascular volume. Less than 3% of Nat is intracellular. More than 40% of total body Nat is in bone; the remainder is in the interstitial and intravascular spaces. The low intracellular (Na*], approximately 10 mEq/L, is maintained by Nat,K+- ATPase, which exchanges intracellular Nat for extracellular K+. Sodium Intake A child's diet determines the amount of Nat ingested-a predomi- nantly cultural determination in older children. An occasional child has salt craving because of an underlying salt-wasting renal disease or adrenal insufficiency. Children in the United States tend to have very high salt intakes because their diets include a large amount of "junk" food or fast food. Infants receive sodium from breast milk (approxi- mately 7 mEq/L) and formula (7-13 mEq/L, for 20 calorie/oz formula). Sodium is readily absorbed throughout the GI tract. Mineralocorti- coids increase sodium transport into the body, although this effect has limited clinical significance. The presence of glucose enhances sodium absorption because of the presence of a co-transport system. This is the rationale for including sodium and glucose in oral rehydration solu- tions (see Chapter 387). Sodium Excretion Sodium excretion occurs in stool and sweat, but the kidney regulates Nat balance and is the principal site of Nat excretion. There is some Na loss in stool, but it is minimal unless diarrhea is present. Normally, sweat has 5-40 mEq/L of sodium. Sweat [Na*] is increased in children with cystic fibrosis, aldosterone deficiency, or pseudohypoaldosteron- ism. The higher sweat losses in these conditions may cause or contrib- Table 73.1 Causes of Hypernatremia EXCESSIVE SODIUM Improperly mixed formula Excess sodium bicarbonate Ingestion of seawater or sodium chloride Intentional salt poisoning (child abuse or fictitious disorder inflicted on another) Intravenous hypertonic saline Sodium phosphate enemas Hyperaldosteronism WATER DEFICIT Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus Acquired X-linked (OMIM 304800) Autosomal recessive (OMIM 125800) Autosomal dominant (OMIM 125800) Central Diabetes Insipidus Acquired* Autosomal recessive (OMIM 125700/600955) Autosomal dominant (OMIM 125700) Wolfram syndrome (OMIM 222300/604928/598500) Hypothalamic neurogenic (essential) adipsic hypernatremia Increased Insensible Losses Premature infants Radiant warmers Phototherapy Inadequate Intake Ineffective breastfeeding Child neglect or abuse Adipsia (lack of thirst) WATER AND SODIUM DEFICITS Gastrointestinal Losses Diarrhea Emesis/nasogastric suction Osmotic cathartics (lactulose) Cutaneous Losses Burns Excessive sweating Renal Losses Osmotic diuretics (mannitol) Diabetes mellitus Chronic kidney disease (dysplasia and obstructive uropathy) Polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis Postobstructive diuresis *Acquired: central diabetes insipidus from CNS malformations, trauma, meningitis, tumor, infiltration, unknown. OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n cbi.nIm.nih.gov/omim). thirst and increased secretion of ADH, which leads to renal conser- vation of water. Both these mechanisms increase the water content of the body, and the [Na*] returns to normal. During hyponatremia, the decrease in plasma osmolality stops ADH secretion, and consequent renal water excretion leads to an increase in the [Na+). Even though water balance is usually regulated by osmolality, volume depletion does stimulate thirst, ADH secretion, and renal conservation of water. Volume depletion takes precedence over osmolality; volume depletion stimulates ADH secretion, even if a patient has hyponatremia. The excretion of Nat by the kidney is not regulated by the plasma osmolality. The patient's effective plasma volume determines the amount of sodium in the urine. This is mediated by a variety of regulatory sys- tems, including the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and intrarenal mechanisms. In hyponatremia or hypernatremia, the underlying patho- physiology determines the amount of urinary Nat, not the serum (Na*). Hypernatremia is a [Na+] >145 mEq/L, although it is sometimes defined as >150 mEq/L. Mild hypernatremia is common in children, especially among infants with gastroenteritis. Hypernatremia in hospi- talized patients may be iatrogenic, which is caused by inadequate water administration or, less often, by excessive Nat administration. Moder- ate or severe hypernatremia has significant morbidity because of the underlying disease, the effects of hypernatremia on the brain, and the risks of overly rapid correction. 

490 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Etiology and Pathophysiology There are three basic mechanisms of hypernatremia (Table 73.1). Sodium intoxication may be iatrogenic in a hospital setting because of correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate. Bak- ing soda, a putative home remedy for upset stomach, is another source of sodium bicarbonate; the hypernatremia is accompanied by a profound metabolic alkalosis. Hypernatremia may develop fol- lowing sodium phosphate emesis. In hyperaldosteronism, there is renal retention of sodium and resultant hypertension; hypernatre- mia may not be present or is usually mild. The classic causes of hypernatremia from a water deficit are neph- rogenic and central diabetes insipidus (see Chapters 570 and 596). Hypernatremia develops in diabetes insipidus only if the patient does not have access to water or cannot drink adequately because of immaturity, neurologic impairment, emesis, or anorexia. Infants are at high risk because of their inability to control their own water intake. Central diabetes insipidus and the genetic forms of nephro- genic diabetes insipidus typically cause massive urinary water losses and very dilute urine. The water losses are less dramatic, and the urine often has the same osmolalty as plasma when nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is secondary to intrinsic renal disease (obstruc- tive uropathy, renal dysplasia, sickle cell disease). The other causes of a water deficit are also secondary to an imbal- ance between losses and intake. Newborns, especially if premature, have high insensible water losses. Losses are further increased if the infant is placed under a radiant warmer or with the use of pho- totherapy for hyperbilirubinemia. The renal concentrating mecha- nisms are not optimal at birth, providing an additional source of water loss. Ineffective breastfeeding, often in a primiparous mother, can cause severe hypernatremic dehydration. Adipsia, the absence of thirst, is usually secondary to damage to the hypothalamus, such as from trauma, tumor, hydrocephalus, or histiocytosis. Primary adipsia (essential hypernatremia) is rare but is seen in children with central nervous system (CNS) malformations (septo-optic dysphasia, holoprosencephaly, optic nerve hypoplasia). When hypernatremia occurs in conditions with deficits of sodium and water, the water deficit exceeds the sodium deficit. This occurs only if the patient is unable to ingest adequate water. Diarrhea results in depletion of both Na* and water. Because diarrhea is hypotonic- typical Nat concentration of 35-65 mEq/L-water losses exceed Na+ losses, potentially leading to hypernatremia. Most children with gas- troenteritis do not have hypernatremia because they drink enough hypotonic fluid to compensate for stool water losses (see Chapter 387). Fluids such as water, juice, and formula are more hypotonic than the stool losses, allowing correction of the water deficit and potentially even causing hyponatremia. Hypernatremia is most likely to occur in the child with diarrhea who has inadequate intake because of emesis, lack of access to water, or anorexia. Osmotic agents, including mannitol, and glucose in diabetes mel- litus, cause excessive renal losses of water and Nat. Because the urine is hypotonic ([Na*) of approximately 50 mEq/L) during an osmotic diuresis, water loss exceeds Na* loss, and hypernatremia may occur if water intake is inadequate. Certain chronic kidney diseases, such as renal dysplasia and obstructive uropathy, are associated with tubular dysfunction, leading to excessive losses of water and Nat. Many chil- dren with such diseases have disproportionate water loss and are at risk for hypernatremic dehydration, especially if gastroenteritis supervenes. Similar mechanisms occur during the polyuric phase of acute kidney injury and after relief of urinary obstruction (postobstructive diuresis). Patients with either condition may have an osmotic diuresis from uri- nary losses of urea and an inability to conserve water because of tubular Clinical Manifestations Most children with hypernatremia are dehydrated and show the typical clinical signs and symptoms (see Chapter 75). Children with hyperna- tremic dehydration tend to have better preservation of intravascular volume because of the shift of water from the ICS to the ECS. This shift maintains blood pressure and urine output and allows hypernatremic infants to be less symptomatic initially and potentially to become more dehydrated before medical attention is sought. Breastfed infants with hypernatremia are often profoundly dehydrated, with failure to thrive (malnutrition). Probably because of intracellular water loss, the pinched abdominal skin of a dehydrated, hypernatremic infant has a "doughy" feel. Hypernatremia, even without dehydration, causes central nervous system (CNS) symptoms that tend to parallel the degree of [Na*] elevation and the acuity of the increase. Patients are irritable, rest- less, weak, and lethargic. Some infants have a high-pitched cry and hyperpnea. Alert patients are very thirsty, even though nausea may be present. Hypernatremia may cause fever, although many patients have an underlying process that contributes to the fever. Hypernatremia is associated with hyperglycemia and mild hypocalcemia; the mecha- nisms are unknown. Beyond the sequelae of dehydration, there is no clear direct effect of hypernatremia on other organs or tissues, except Brain hemorrhage is the most devastating consequence of untreated hypernatremia. As the extracellular osmolality increases, water moves out of brain cells, leading to a decrease in brain volume. This decrease can result in tearing of intracerebral veins and bridging blood vessels as the brain moves away from the skull and the meninges. Patients may have subarachnoid, subdural, and parenchymal hemorrhages. Seizures and coma are possible sequelae of the hemorrhage, although seizures are more common during correction of hypernatremia. The cerebro- spinal fluid protein is often elevated in infants with significant hyper- natremia, probably because of leakage from damaged blood vessels. Neonates, especially if premature, seem especially vulnerable to hyper- natremia and excessive sodium intake. There is an association between rapid or hyperosmolar sodium bicarbonate administration and the development of intraventricular hemorrhages in neonates. Even though osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS), which includes central pontine myelinolysis and extrapontine myelinolysis, is classi- cally associated with overly rapid correction of hyponatremia, it can occur in children with hypernatremia (see "Treatment"). Thrombotic complications occur in severe hypernatremic dehydration, including stroke, dural sinus thrombosis, peripheral thrombosis, and renal vein thrombosis. This is secondary to dehydration and possibly hyperco- agulability associated with hypernatremia. Diagnosis The etiology of hypernatremia is usually apparent from the history. Hypernatremia resulting from water loss occurs only if the patient does not have access to water or is unable to drink. In the absence of dehydration, it is important to ask about sodium intake. Chil- dren with excess salt intake do not have signs of dehydration, unless another process is present. Severe Na* intoxication causes signs of volume overload, such as pulmonary edema and weight gain. Salt poisoning is associated with an elevated fractional excretion of Nat, whereas hypernatremic dehydration causes a low fractional excretion of Nat. Gastric sodium concentrations are often elevated in salt poisoning. In hyperaldosteronism, hypernatremia is usually mild or absent and is associated with edema, hypertension, hypoka- lemia, and metabolic alkalosis. When there is isolated water loss, the signs of volume depletion are usually less severe initially because much of the loss is from the ICS. When pure water loss causes signs of dehydration, the hyper- natremia and water deficit are usually severe. In the child with renal water loss, either central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, the urine is inappropriately dilute and urine volume is not low. The urine is maximally concentrated and urine volume is low if the losses are extrarenal or caused by inadequate intake. With extra- renal causes of loss of water, the urine osmolality should be >1,000 mOsm/kg. When diabetes insipidus is suspected, the evaluation may include measurement of ADH and a water-deprivation test, including a trial of desmopressin acetate (synthetic ADH analog) to differentiate between nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and central 

diabetes insipidus (see Chapters 570 and 596). A water-deprivation test is unnecessary if the patient has simultaneous documentation of hypernatremia and poorly concentrated urine (osmolality lower than that of plasma). In children with central diabetes insipidus, administration of desmopressin acetate increases the urine osmo- lality above the plasma osmolality, although maximum osmolality does not occur immediately because of the decreased osmolality of the renal medulla as a result of the chronic lack of ADH. In chil- dren with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, there is no response to desmopressin acetate. Hypercalcemia or hypokalemia may produce a nephrogenic diabetes insipidus-like syndrome. With combined Nat and water deficits, analysis of the urine differen- tiates between renal and nonrenal etiologies. When the losses are extra- renal, the kidney responds to volume depletion with low urine volume, concentrated urine, and Nat retention (urine [Na+] <20 mEq/L, frac- tional excretion of Na* <1%). With renal causes, the urine volume is not appropriately low, the urine is not maximally concentrated, and the urine [Na*] may be inappropriately elevated. Treatment As hypernatremia develops, the brain generates idiogenic osmoles to increase the intracellular osmolality and prevent the loss of brain water. This mechanism is not instantaneous and is most prominent when hypernatremia has developed gradually. If the serum (Nat] is lowered rapidly, there is movement of water from the serum into the brain cells to equalize the osmolality in the two compartments. The resultant brain swelling may manifest as seizures or coma. Because of the associated dangers, chronic hypernatremia should not be corrected rapidly. The goal is to decrease the serum [Na*], but avoid a decrease of more than 10 mEq/L every 24 hours. The most impor- tant component of correcting moderate or severe hypernatremia is fre- quent monitoring of the serum [Na*] value so that fluid therapy can be adjusted to provide adequate correction, neither too slow nor too fast. If a child has seizures because of brain edema secondary to rapid correction, administration of hypotonic fluid should be stopped. An infusion of 3% saline can acutely increase the serum [Na*], reversing the cerebral edema. tremic dehydration. Acute, severe hypernatremia, usually secondary to sodium administration, can be corrected more rapidly with 5% dex- trose in water (D5W) because idiogenic osmoles have not had time to accumulate. This fact balances the high morbidity and mortality rates associated with hypernatremia with the dangers of overly rapid correc- tion. When hypernatremia is severe and is caused by sodium intoxi- cation, it may be impossible to administer enough water to correct the hypernatremia rapidly without worsening the volume overload. In this situation, dialysis allows for removal of the excess Nat, with the precise strategy dependent on the mode of dialysis. In less severe cases, the addition of a loop diuretic increases the removal of excess Nat and water, decreasing the risk of volume overload. With Na* over- load, hypernatremia is corrected with Nat-free intravenous (IV) fluid Hyperglycemia from hypernatremia is not usually a problem and is not treated with insulin because the acute decrease in glucose may precipitate cerebral edema by lowering plasma osmolality. Rarely, the glucose concentration of IV fluids must be reduced (from 5% to 2.5% dextrose in water). The secondary hypocalcemia is treated as needed. It is important to address the underlying cause of the hyperna- tremia, if possible. The child with central diabetes insipidus should receive desmopressin acetate. Because this treatment reduces renal excretion of water, excessive intake of water must be avoided to prevent both overly rapid correction of the hypernatremia and the development of hyponatremia. Over the long-term, reduced sodium intake and the use of medications can somewhat amelio- rate the water losses in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (see Chapter 570). The daily water intake of a child receiving tube feeding may need to be increased to compensate for high losses. The patient with Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 491 significant ongoing losses, such as through diarrhea, may need sup- plemental water and electrolytes (see Chapter 74). Sodium intake is reduced if it contributed to the hypernatremia. HYPONATREMIA Hyponatremia, a very common electrolyte abnormality in hospitalized patients, is a serum sodium level < 135 mEq/L. Both total body sodium and TBW determine the serum sodium concentration. Hyponatremia exists when the ratio of water to Nat is increased. This condition can occur with low, normal, or high levels of body Nat. Similarly, body water can be low, normal, or high. Etiology and Pathophysiology Table 73.2 lists the causes of hyponatremia. Pseudohyponatremia is a laboratory artifact present when the plasma contains very high concentrations of protein (multiple myeloma, intravenous immune globulin [IVIG] infusion) or lipid (hypertriglyceridemia, hypercho- lesterolemia). It does not occur when a direct ion-selective elec- trode determines the [Nat] in undiluted plasma, a technique that is used by ABG analyzers or POC instruments (see Chapter 73.1). In true hyponatremia, the measured osmolality is low, whereas it is normal in pseudohyponatremia. Hyperosmolality, as may occur with hyperglycemia, causes a low [Na*] because water moves down its osmotic gradient from the ICS into the ECS, diluting the [Na*). However, because the manifestations of hyponatremia are a result of the low plasma osmolality, patients with hyponatremia result- ing from hyperosmolality do not have symptoms of hyponatremia. When the etiology of the hyperosmolality resolves, such as hyper- glycemia in diabetes mellitus, water moves back into the cells, and the [Nat] rises to its "true" value. Mannitol or sucrose, a compo- nent of IVIG preparations, may cause hyponatremia because of Classification of hyponatremia is based on the patient's volume status. In hypovolemic hyponatremia, the child has lost Nat from the body. The water balance may be positive or negative, but Nat loss has been higher than water loss. The pathogenesis of the hypo- natremia is usually a combination of Na* loss and water retention to compensate for the volume depletion. The patient has a pathologic increase in fluid loss, and this fluid contains Na*. Most fluid that is lost has a lower [Na*] than that of plasma. Viral diarrhea fluid has an average [Na*] of 50 mEq/L. Replacing diarrhea fluid, which has [Na*] of 50 mEq/L, with formula, which has only approximately 7-10 mEq/L of Na*, reduces the serum [Na*). Intravascular volume depletion interferes with renal water excretion, the body's usual mechanism for preventing hyponatremia. The volume depletion stimulates ADH synthesis, resulting in renal water retention. Vol- ume depletion also decreases the GFR and enhances water resorp- tion in the proximal tubule, thereby reducing water delivery to the collecting duct. Diarrhea as a result of gastroenteritis is the most common cause of hypovolemic hyponatremia in children. Emesis causes hypona- tremia if the patient takes in hypotonic fluid, either IV or enterally, despite the emesis. Most patients with emesis have either a normal (Na*] or hypernatremia. Burns may cause massive losses of isotonic fluid and resultant volume depletion. Hyponatremia develops if the patient receives hypotonic fluid. Losses of sodium from sweat are especially high in children with cystic fibrosis, aldosterone deficiency, or pseudohypoaldosteronism, although high losses can also occur in a hot climate. Third space losses are isotonic and can cause significant volume depletion, leading to ADH production and water retention, which can cause hyponatremia if the patient receives hypotonic fluid. In diseases that cause volume deple- tion through extrarenal Nat loss, the urine Nat level should be low (<10 mEq/L) as part of the renal response to maintain the intravascular volume. The only exceptions are diseases that cause both extrarenal and renal Na* losses: adrenal insufficiency and pseudohypoaldosteronism. 

492 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Table 73.2 Causes of Hyponatremia PSEUDOHYPONATREMIA Hyperlipidemia Hyperproteinemia HYPEROSMOLALITY Hyperglycemia latrogenic (mannitol, sucrose, glycine) HYPOVOLEMIC HYPONATREMIA Extrarenal Losses Gastrointestinal (emesis, diarrhea) Skin (sweating or burns) Third space losses (bowel obstruction, peritonitis, sepsis) Renal Losses Thiazide or loop diuretics Osmotic diuresis Postobstructive diuresis Polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis Juvenile nephronophthisis (OMIM 256100/606966/602088/604387/6 11498) Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (OMIM 263200) Tubulointerstitial nephritis Obstructive uropathy Cerebral salt wasting Proximal (type Il) renal tubular acidosis (OMIM 604278)* Lack of aldosterone effect (high serum potassium): Absence of aldosterone (e.g., 21-hydroxylase deficiency [OMIM Pseudohypoaldosteronism type | (OMIM 264350/177735) Urinary tract obstruction and/or infection EUVOLEMIC HYPONATREMIA Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (OMIM 304800) Desmopressin acetate Glucocorticoid deficiency Hypothyroidism Antidepressant medications Water intoxication latrogenic (excess hypotonic intravenous fluids) Feeding infants excessive water products Swimming lessons Tap water enema Child abuse Psychogenic polydipsia Diluted formula Beer potomania Exercise-induced hyponatremia HYPERVOLEMIC HYPONATREMIA Heart failure Cirrhosis Nephrotic syndrome Acute, chronic kidney injury Capillary leak caused by sepsis Hypoalbuminemia caused by gastrointestinal disease (protein-losing enteropathy) *Most cases of proximal renal tubular acidosis are not caused by this primary genetic disorder. Proximal renal tubular acidosis is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which has multiple etiologies. OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n cbi.nIm.nih.gov/omim). Renal Na+ loss may occur in a variety of situations. In some situations the urine [Na*] is >140 mEq/L; thus hyponatremia may occur without any fluid intake. In many cases, the urine Na* level is less than the serum [Na+); hence, the intake of hypotonic fluid Table 73.3 Diagnostic Criteria for Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion • Absence of: Renal, adrenal, or thyroid insufficiency Heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, or cirrhosis Diuretic ingestion Dehydration • Urine osmolality > 100 mOsm/kg (usually > plasma) • Serum osmolality <280 mOsm/kg and serum sodium < 135 mEq/L • Urine sodium >30 mEq/L • Reversal of "sodium wasting" and correction of hyponatremia with water restriction is necessary for hyponatremia to develop. In diseases associated with urinary Nat loss, the urine Nat level is >20 mEq/L despite volume depletion. This may not be true if the urinary Na+ loss is no longer occurring, as is frequently the case if diuretics are dis- continued. Because loop diuretics prevent generation of a maxi- mally hypertonic renal medulla, the patient can neither maximally dilute nor concentrate the urine. The inability to maximally retain water provides some protection against severe hyponatremia. The patient receiving thiazide diuretics can concentrate the urine and is at higher risk for severe hyponatremia. Osmotic agents, such as glucose during diabetic ketoacidosis, cause loss of both water and Nat. Urea accumulates during kidney failure and then acts as an osmotic diuretic after relief of urinary tract obstruction and dur- ing the polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis. Transient tubu- lar damage in these conditions further impairs Nat conservation. The serum [Nat] in these conditions depends on [Nat] of the fluid used to replace the losses. Hyponatremia develops when the fluid is hypotonic relative to the urinary losses. Renal salt wasting occurs in hereditary kidney diseases, such as juvenile nephronophthisis and autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease. Obstructive uropathy, most often a result of pos- terior urethral valves, produces salt wasting, but patients with the disease may also have hypernatremia as a result of impaired ability to concentrate urine and high-water loss. Acquired tubulointersti- tial nephritis, usually secondary to either medications or infections, may cause salt wasting, along with other evidence of tubular dys- function. CNS injury may produce cerebral salt wasting, which is theoretically caused by the production of a natriuretic peptide that causes renal salt wasting. In type II renal tubular acidosis (RTA), usually associated with Fanconi syndrome (see Chapter 569.1), there is increased excretion of Nat and bicarbonate in the urine. Patients with Fanconi syndrome also have glycosuria, aminoacid- uria, and hypophosphatemia because of renal phosphate wasting. Aldosterone is necessary for renal Nat retention and for the excretion of K+ and acid. In congenital adrenal hyperplasia caused by 21-hydroxylase deficiency, the block of aldosterone production results in hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis. Decreased aldosterone secretion may be seen in Addison disease (adrenal insufficiency). In pseudohypoaldosteronism, aldosterone levels are elevated, but there is no response because of either a defective Nat channel or a deficiency of aldosterone receptors. A lack of tubular response to aldosterone may occur in children with urinary tract obstruction, especially during an acute urinary tract infection. In hypervolemic hyponatremia, there is an excess of TBW and Nat, although the increase in water is greater than the increase in Nat. In most conditions that cause hypervolemic hyponatremia, there is a decrease in the effective blood volume, resulting from third space fluid loss, vasodilation, or poor cardiac output. The regula- tory systems sense a decrease in effective blood volume and attempt to retain water and Nat to correct the problem. ADH causes renal water retention, and the kidney, under the influence of aldosterone and other intrarenal mechanisms, retains sodium. The patient's 

sodium concentration decreases because water intake exceeds sodium intake and ADH prevents the normal loss of excess water. In these disorders, there is low urine [Na+] (<10 mEq/L) and an excess of both TBW and Nat. The only exception is in patients with kidney failure and hyponatremia. These patients have an expanded intravascular volume, and hyponatremia can therefore appropriately suppress ADH production. Water cannot be excreted because very little urine is being made. Serum Nat is diluted through ingestion of water. Because of renal dysfunction, the urine [Na*] may be elevated, but urine volume is so low that urine Nat excretion has not kept up with Nat intake, leading to sodium overload. The urine [Na*] in kid- ney failure varies. In patients with acute glomerulonephritis, because it does not affect the tubules, the urine Na* level is usually low, whereas in patients with acute tubular necrosis, it is elevated because of tubular Patients with hyponatremia and no evidence of volume overload or volume depletion have euvolemic hyponatremia. These patients typically have an excess of TBW and a slight decrease in total body Na*. Some of these patients have an increase in weight, implying that they are volume overloaded. Nevertheless, from a clinical standpoint, they usually appear normal or have subtle signs of fluid overload. In SIADH the secretion of ADH is not inhibited by either low serum osmolality or expanded intravascular volume (see Chap- ter 597). The result is that the child with SIADH is unable to excrete water. This results in dilution of the serum Na* and hyponatremia. The expansion of the extracellular volume because of the retained water causes a mild increase in intravascular volume. The kidney increases Nat excretion to decrease intravascular volume to normal; thus the patient has a mild decrease in body Nat. SIADH typically occurs with disorders of the CNS (infection, hemorrhage, trauma, tumor, thrombosis, Guillain-Barré syndrome), but lung disease (infection, asthma, positive pressure ventilation) and malignant tumors (producing ADH) are other potential causes. A variety of medications may cause SIADH, including recreational use of 3,4 -methylenedioxymethylamphetamine (MDMA, or "Ecstasy"), opi- ates, antiepileptic drugs (carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, valproate), tricyclic antidepressants, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and selec- tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). The diagnosis of SIADH is one of exclusion, because other causes of hyponatremia must be eliminated (Table 73.3). Because SIADH is a state of intravascular volume expansion, low serum uric acid and BUN levels are sup- portive of the diagnosis. A rare gain-of-function pathogenic variant in the renal ADH receptor causes nephrogenic syndrome of inap- propriate antidiuresis. Patients with this X-linked disorder appear to have SIADH but have undetectable levels of ADH. Hyponatremia in hospitalized patients is frequently caused by inappropriate production of ADH and administration of hypotonic IV fluids (see Chapter 74). Causes of inappropriate ADH produc- tion include stress, medications such as narcotics or anesthetics, nausea, and respiratory illness. The synthetic analog of ADH, des- mopressin acetate, causes water retention and may cause hypona- tremia if fluid intake is not appropriately limited. The main uses of desmopressin acetate in children are for the management of central diabetes insipidus and nocturnal enuresis. Excess water ingestion can produce hyponatremia. In these cases, [Na*] decreases as a result of dilution. This decrease sup- presses ADH secretion, and there is a marked water diuresis by the kidney. Hyponatremia develops only because the intake of water exceeds the kidney's ability to eliminate water. This condition is more likely to occur in infants because their lower GFR limits their ability to excrete water. Hyponatremia may develop in infants <6 months of age when care- givers offer water to their infant as a supplement, during hot weather, or when they run out of formula. Hyponatremia may result in transient seizures, hypothermia, and poor tone. With cessation of water intake, the hyponatremia rapidly corrects. Infants <6 months of age should not be given water to drink; infants 6-12 months of age should not receive >1-2 ounces. If the infant appears thirsty, the parent should offer formula or breastfeed the child. Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 493 In some situations the water intoxication causes acute hypona- tremia and is caused by a massive acute water load. Causes include infant swimming lessons, inappropriate use of hypotonic IV fluids, water enemas, and forced water intake as a form of child abuse. Chronic hyponatremia occurs in children who receive water but limited sodium and protein. The minimum urine osmolality is approximately 50 mOsm/kg; the kidney can excrete 1 L of water only if there is enough solute ingested to produce 50 mOsm for urinary excretion. Because Na* and urea (a breakdown product of protein) are the principal urinary solutes, a lack of intake of Na* and protein prevents adequate water excretion. This occurs with the use of diluted formula or other inappropriate diets. Subsistence on beer, a poor source of Nat and protein, causes hyponatremia because of the inability to excrete the high water load ("beer potomania"). Exercise-induced hyponatremia, reported frequently during mar- athons, is caused by excessive water intake, salt losses from sweat, The pathogenesis of the hyponatremia in glucocorticoid deficiency (adrenal insufficiency) is multifactorial and includes increased ADH secretion. In hypothyroidism there is an inappropriate retention of water by the kidney, but the precise mechanisms are not clearly Cerebral salt wasting, an uncommon disorder in children, may be confused with SIADH and is often associated with CNS injury or lesions. Cerebral salt wasting produces renal salt losses and hypovole- mia (orthostatic hypotension and elevated hematocrit, BUN, or creati- nine). Hypovolemia is not seen in SIADH. Clinical Manifestations Hyponatremia causes a decrease in the osmolality of the ECS. Because the ICS then has a higher osmolality, water moves from the ECS to the ICS to maintain osmotic equilibrium. The increase in intracellu- lar water causes cells to swell. Although cell swelling is not problem- atic in most tissues, it is dangerous for the brain, which is confined by the skull. As brain cells swell, there is an increase in intracranial pressure (ICP), which impairs cerebral blood flow. Acute, severe hypo- natremia can cause brainstem herniation and apnea; respiratory sup- port is often necessary. Brain cell swelling is responsible for most of the symptoms of hyponatremia. Neurologic symptoms of hyponatremia include anorexia, nausea, emesis, malaise, lethargy, confusion, agita- tion, headache, seizures, coma, and decreased reflexes. Patients may have hypothermia and Cheyne-Stokes respirations. Hyponatremia can cause muscle cramps and weakness; rhabdomyolysis can occur with water intoxication. The symptoms of hyponatremia are mostly a result of the decrease in extracellular osmolality and the resulting movement of water down its osmotic gradient into the ICS. Brain swelling can be significantly obviated if the hyponatremia develops gradually, because brain cells adapt to the decreased extracellular osmolality by reducing intracel- lular osmolality. This reduction is achieved by extrusion of the main intracellular ions (K+, CI) and a variety of small organic molecules. This process explains why the range of symptoms in hyponatremia is related to both the serum [Na*] and its rate of decrease. A patient with chronic hyponatremia may have only subtle neurologic abnormali- ties with a serum [Na*] of 110 mkg/L, but another patient may have seizures because of an acute decline in serum [Nat] from 140 to 125 Diagnosis The history usually points to a likely etiology of the hyponatremia. Most patients with hyponatremia have a history of volume depletion. Diarrhea and diuretic use are common causes of hyponatremia in chil- dren. A history of polyuria, perhaps with enuresis, and/or salt crav- ing is present in children with primary kidney diseases or absence of aldosterone effect. Children may have signs or symptoms suggesting a diagnosis of hypothyroidism or adrenal insufficiency (see Chapters 603 and 615). Brain injury raises the possibility of SIADH or cerebral salt wasting, with the caveat that SIADH is much more likely. Liver disease, nephrotic syndrome, kidney failure, or congestive heart failure may be 

494 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders acute or chronic. The history should include a review of the patient's intake, both IV and enteral, with careful attention to the amounts of water, Nat, and protein. The traditional first step in the diagnostic process is determination of the plasma osmolality. This is done because some patients with a low serum [Na+] do not have low osmolality. The clinical effects of hypona- tremia are secondary to the associated low osmolality. Without a low osmolality, there is no movement of water into the ICS. A patient with hyponatremia can have a low, normal, or high osmo- lality. A normal osmolality in combination with hyponatremia occurs in pseudohyponatremia. Children with elevation of serum glucose concentration or of another effective osmole (mannitol) have a high plasma osmolality and hyponatremia. The presence of a low osmolality indicates "true" hyponatremia. Patients with low osmolality are at risk for neurologic symptoms and require further evaluation to determine the etiology of the hyponatremia. In some situations, true hyponatremia is present despite a normal or elevated plasma osmolality. The presence of an ineffective osmole, usually urea, increases the plasma osmolality, but because urea has the same concentration in the ICS, it does not cause fluid to move into the ECS. There is no dilution of the serum Na+ by water, and the [Na*] remains unchanged if the ineffective osmole is eliminated. Most importantly, the ineffective osmole does not protect the brain from edema caused by hyponatremia. Therefore a patient may have symp- toms of hyponatremia despite having a normal or increased osmolality because of uremia. In patients with true hyponatremia, the next step in the diagnostic process is to clinically evaluate the volume status. Patients with hypo- natremia can be hypovolemic, hypervolemic, or euvolemic. The diag- nosis of volume depletion relies on the usual findings with dehydration (see Chapter 75), although subtle volume depletion may not be clini- cally apparent. Children with hypervolemia are edematous on physical examination. They may have ascites, pulmonary edema, pleural effu- sion, or hypertension. Hypovolemic hyponatremia can have renal or nonrenal causes. The urine [Na*] is very useful in differentiating between renal and nonrenal causes. When the losses are nonrenal and the kidney is working properly, there is renal retention of Na*, a normal homeo- static response to volume depletion. Thus the urinary [Nat] is low, typically <10 mEq/L, although Nat conservation in neonates is less avid. When the kidney is the cause of the Na+ loss, the urine [Na*] is >20 mEq/L, reflecting the defect in renal Na* retention. The inter- pretation of the urine Na* level is challenging with diuretic therapy because it is high when diuretics are being used but low after the diuretic effect is gone. This becomes an issue only when diuretic use is surreptitious. The urine [Nat] is not useful if a metabolic alkalosis is present; the urine [CI] must be used instead (see Chap- Differentiating among the nonrenal causes of hypovolemic hypona- tremia is usually facilitated by the history. Although the renal causes are more challenging to distinguish, a high serum [K*] is associated with disorders in which the Nat wasting is caused by absence of or ineffectiveness of aldosterone. In the patient with hypervolemic hyponatremia, the urine [Na*] is a helpful parameter. It is usually < 10 mEq/L, except in the patient with kidney failure. Treatment The management of hyponatremia is based on the pathophysiology of the specific etiology. The management of all causes requires judicious monitoring and avoidance of an overly quick normalization of the serum [Na*]. A patient with severe symptoms (seizures), no matter the etiology, should be given a bolus of hypertonic saline to produce a small, rapid increase in serum sodium. Hypoxia worsens cerebral edema, and hyponatremia may exacerbate hypoxic cell swelling. There- fore pulse oximetry should be monitored and hypoxia aggressively corrected. With all causes of hyponatremia, it is important to avoid overly rapid correction, which may cause osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS), which includes central pontine myelinolysis and extrapontine myelinolysis. This syndrome, which occurs within several days of rapid correction of hyponatremia, produces neurologic symptoms, includ- ing confusion, agitation, flaccid or spastic quadriparesis, and death. There are usually characteristic pathologic and radiologic changes in the brain. Despite severe symptoms, full recovery does occur in some patients. ODS is more common in patients who are treated for chronic hyponatremia than for acute hyponatremia. Presumably, this differ- ence is based on the adaptation of brain cells to the hyponatremia. The reduced intracellular osmolality, an adaptive mechanism for chronic hyponatremia, makes brain cells susceptible to dehydra- tion during rapid correction of the hyponatremia, which may be the mechanism of ODS. Even though ODS is rare in pediatric patients, it is advisable to avoid correcting the serum [Na*] by >10 mEq/L/24 hr or >18 mEq/L/48 hr. Desmopressin is a potential option if the serum [Na*] is increasing too rapidly. This guideline does not apply to acute hyponatremia, as may occur with water intoxica- tion, because the hyponatremia is more often symptomatic, and the adaptive decrease in brain osmolality has not had time to occur. The consequences of brain edema in acute hyponatremia exceed the small risk of ODS. Patients with hyponatremia can have severe neurologic symptoms, such as seizures and coma. The seizures associated with hyponatre- mia generally are poorly responsive to anticonvulsants. The child with hyponatremia and severe symptoms needs treatment that will quickly reduce cerebral edema. This goal is best accomplished by increasing the extracellular osmolality so that water moves down its osmolar gradient from the ICS to the ECS. Intravenous hypertonic saline rapidly increases serum [Na*1, and the effect on serum osmolality leads to a decrease in brain edema. Each mL/kg of 3% NaCl increases the serum [Na+] by approximately 1 mEq/L. A child with active symptoms often improves after receiving 4-6 mL/kg of 3% NaCl. The child with hypovolemic hyponatremia has a deficiency in Na+ and may have a deficiency in water. The cornerstone of therapy is to replace the Na* deficit and any water deficit present. The first step in treating any dehydrated patient is to restore the intravascular volume with isotonic saline. Ultimately, complete restoration of intravascular volume suppresses ADH production, thereby permitting excretion of the excess water. Chapter 75 discusses the management of hypona- tremic dehydration. The management of hypervolemic hyponatremia is difficult; patients have an excess of both water and Nat. Administration of Na leads to worsening volume overload and edema. In addition, patients are retaining water and Nat because of their ineffective intravascular volume or renal insufficiency. The cornerstone of therapy is water and Nat restriction, because patients have volume overload. Diuretics may help by causing excretion of both Na* and water. Vasopressin receptor antagonists (vaptans), by blocking the action of ADH and causing a water diuresis, are effective in correct- ing the hypervolemic hyponatremia caused by heart failure. Vaptans are contraindicated if there are moderate to severe CNS symptoms. Hyponatremic patients with low albumin from nephrotic syn- drome have a better response to diuretics after an infusion of 25% albumin; the [Nat] often normalizes as a result of expansion of the intravascular volume. A child with heart failure may have an increase in renal water and Nat excretion if there is an improvement in cardiac output. This improvement will "turn off" the regulatory hormones causing renal water (ADH) and Na+ (aldosterone) reten- tion. The patient with kidney failure cannot respond to any of these therapies except fluid restriction. Insensible fluid losses eventually result in an increase in the Na*| as long as insensible and urinary losses are greater than intake. A more definitive approach in chil- dren with kidney failure is to perform dialysis, which removes water and Nat. In isovolumic hyponatremia there is usually an excess of water and a mild Na+ deficit. Therapy is directed at eliminating the excess water. The child with acute excessive water intake loses water in the urine 

because ADH production is turned off as a result of the low plasma osmolality. Children may correct their hyponatremia spontaneously over 3-6 hours. For acute, symptomatic hyponatremia as a result of water intoxication, hypertonic saline may be needed to reverse cere- bral edema. For chronic hyponatremia from poor solute intake, the eliminated. - Per copie hymen to out said mati the Children with iatrogenic hyponatremia caused by the administra- tion of hypotonic IV fluids should receive 3% saline if symptomatic. Subsequent management is dictated by the patient's volume status. The hypovolemic child should receive isotonic IV fluids. The child with nonphysiologic stimuli for ADH production should undergo fluid restriction. Prevention of this iatrogenic complication requires judi- cious use of IV fluids (see Chapter 74). Specific hormone replacement is the cornerstone of therapy for the hyponatremia of hypothyroidism or cortisol deficiency. Correction of the underlying defect permits appropriate elimination of the excess SIADH is a condition of excess water, with limited ability of the kidney to excrete water. The mainstay of its therapy is fluid restric- tion with normal sodium intake. Furosemide and NaCl supple- mentation are effective in the patient with SIADH and severe hyponatremia. Even in a patient with SIADH, furosemide causes an increase in water and Nat excretion. The loss of Nat is somewhat counterproductive, but this Nat can be replaced with hypertonic saline. Because the patient has a net loss of water and the urinary losses of Nat have been replaced, there is an increase in the [Na+], but no significant increase in blood pressure. Vaptans, which block the action of ADH and cause a water diuresis, are effective at cor- recting euvolemic hyponatremia, but overly rapid correction is a potential complication. Vaptans are not appropriate for treating symptomatic hyponatremia because it can take a few hours before Treatment of chronic SIADH is challenging. Fluid restriction in chil- dren is difficult for nutritional and behavioral reasons. Other options are long-term furosemide therapy with Nat supplementation, an oral vaptan (tolvaptan), or oral urea. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 73.4 Potassium Larry A. Greenbaum POTASSIUM METABOLISM Body Content and Physiologic Function The intracellular [K*], approximately 150 mEq/L, is much higher than the plasma [K*] (see Fig. 73.3). The majority of body K* is contained in muscle. As muscle mass increases, there is an increase in body Kt. Thus an increase in body K+ occurs during puberty, and it is more significant in males. The majority of extracellular K+ is in bone; <1% of total body K+ is in plasma. Because most K* is intracellular, the plasma concentration does not always reflect the total body K+ content. A variety of condi- tions alter the distribution of K+ between the intracellular and extracellular compartments. Nat,K+-ATPase maintains the high intracellular [K*] by pumping Nat out of the cell and K* into the cell. This activity balances the normal leak of K* out of cells via potassium channels that is driven by the favorable chemical gradient. Insulin increases K+ movement into cells by activat- ing Na*,K*-ATPase. Hyperkalemia stimulates insulin secretion, which helps mitigate the hyperkalemia. Acid-base status affects K+ distribution, probably via K+ channels and the Na*,K*-ATPase. A decrease in pH drives potassium extracellularly; an increase in pH has the opposite effect. ß-Adrenergic agonists stimulate the Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 495 Na+,K+-ATPase, increasing cellular uptake of K+. This increase is protective, in that hyperkalemia stimulates adrenal release of catecholamines. a-Adrenergic agonists and exercise cause a net movement of K+ out of the ICS. An increase in plasma osmolality, as with mannitol infusion, leads to water movement out of the cells, and K+ follows as a result of solvent drag. The serum [K+] increases by approximately 0.6 mEq/L with each 10 mOsm rise in plasma osmolality. The high intracellular concentration of K*, the principal intracel- lular cation, is maintained through Na*,K+-ATPase. The resulting chemical gradient is used to produce the resting membrane poten- tial of cells. Kt is necessary for the electrical responsiveness of nerve and muscle cells and for the contractility of cardiac, skeletal, and smooth muscle. The changes in membrane polarization that occur during muscle contraction or nerve conduction make these cells susceptible to changes in serum [K*]. The ratio of intracellular to extracellular K+ determines the threshold for a cell to generate an action potential and the rate of cellular repolarization. The intracel- lular [K*] affects cellular enzymes. K* is necessary for maintaining cell volume because of its important contribution to intracellular osmolality. Potassium Intake Potassium is plentiful in food. Dietary consumption varies con- siderably, even though 1-2 mEq/kg is the recommended intake. The intestines normally absorb approximately 90% of ingested K+. Most absorption occurs in the small intestine, whereas the colon exchanges body K* for luminal Na*. Regulation of intestinal losses normally has a minimal role in maintaining potassium homeostasis, although kidney failure, aldosterone, and glucocorticoids increase colonic secretion of K*. The increase in intestinal losses in the set- ting of kidney failure and hyperkalemia, which stimulates aldoste- rone production, is clinically significant, helping to protect against hyperkalemia. Potassium Excretion Some loss of K* occurs in sweat but is normally minimal. The colon has the ability to eliminate some K*. In addition, after an acute K* load, much of the K+ (>40%) moves intracellularly, through the actions of epinephrine and insulin, which are produced in response to hyperka- lemia. This process provides transient protection from hyperkalemia, but most ingested K+ is eventually excreted in the urine. The kidneys principally regulate long-term K+ balance, and they alter excretion in response to a variety of signals. K+ is freely filtered at the glomeru- lus, but 90% is resorbed before reaching the distal tubule and collect- ing duct, the principal sites of K+ regulation that have the ability to absorb and secrete K*. The amount of tubular secretion regulates the amount of K+ that appears in the urine. The plasma [K*] directly influ- ences secretion in the distal nephron. As the [K*] increases, secretion The principal hormone regulating potassium secretion is aldo- sterone, which is released by the adrenal cortex in response to increased plasma Kt. Its main site of action is the cortical collect- ing duct, where aldosterone stimulates Nat movement from the tubule into the cells. This movement creates a negative charge in the tubular lumen, facilitating K+ excretion. In addition, the increased intracellular Na* stimulates the basolateral Na*,K+-ATPase, causing more K+ to move into the cells lining the cortical collecting duct. Glucocorticoids, ADH, a high urinary flow rate, and high Na* deliv- ery to the distal nephron also increase urinary K* excretion. Insu- lin, catecholamines, and urinary ammonia decrease K* excretion. Whereas ADH increases K+ secretion, it also causes water resorp- tion, decreasing urinary flow. The net effect is that ADH has little overall impact on K+ balance. Alkalosis causes potassium to move into cells, including the cells lining the collecting duct. This move- ment increases K* secretion, and because acidosis has the opposite effect; acidosis decreases K* secretion. 

496 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders The kidney can dramatically vary K* excretion in response to changes in intake. Normally, approximately 10-15% of the filtered load is excreted. In an adult, excretion of K+ can vary from 5-1,000 mEq/day. HYPERKALEMIA Hyperkalemia-because of the potential for lethal arrhythmias-is one of the most alarming electrolyte abnormalities. Etiology and Pathophysiology Ihree basic mechanisms cause hyperkalemia including increased intake, cellular shifts, and decreased excretion; spurious lab values are also commonly seen (Table 73.4). In the individual patient, the etiology is sometimes multifactorial. Spurious hyperkalemia or pseudohyperkalemia is very common in children because of the difficulties in obtaining blood specimens. This laboratory result is usually caused by hemolysis during a heelstick or phlebotomy, but it can be the result of prolonged tourniquet applica- tion or fist clenching, either of which causes local potassium release from muscle. secondary m lie stroll els uns cigher that the plasma value. enon is exaggerated with thrombocytosis because of K+ release from platelets. For every 100,000/m' increase in the platelet count, the serum [K*] rises by approximately 0.15 mEq/L. This phenomenon also occurs with the marked white blood cell (WBC) count elevations sometimes seen with leukemia. Elevated WBC counts, typically >200,000/m', can cause a dramatic elevation in the measured serum [K*]. Analysis of a plasma sample usually provides an accurate result. It is important to analyze the sample promptly to avoid K* release from cells, which occurs if the sample is stored in the cold, or cellular uptake of K* and spurious hypokalemia, which occurs with storage at room tempera- ture. Pneumatic tube transport can cause pseudohyperkalemia if cell membranes are fragile (leukemia). Occasionally, heparin causes lysis of leukemic cells and a false elevation of the plasma sample; a blood gas syringe has less heparin and may provide a more accurate reading than a standard tube. There are rare genetic disorders causing in vitro leak- age of K+ from red blood cells (RBCs) that may causes familial pseudo- hyperkalemia (autosomal dominant; ABCB6 gene). Because of the kidney's ability to excrete K*, it is unusual for exces- sive intake, by itself, to cause hyperkalemia. This condition can occur in a patient who is receiving large quantities of IV or oral K* for excessive losses that are no longer present. Frequent or rapid blood transfusions can acutely increase the [K*] because of the K+ content of blood, which is variably elevated. Increased intake may precipitate hyperkalemia if there is an underlying defect in K* excretion. The ICS has a very high [K*], so a shift of K+ from the ICS to the ECS can have a significant effect on the plasma [K*]. This shift occurs with metabolic acidosis, but the effect is minimal with an organic acid (lac- tic acidosis, ketoacidosis). A respiratory acidosis has less impact than a metabolic acidosis. Cell destruction, as seen with rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis syndrome, tissue necrosis, or hemolysis, releases K+ into the extracellular milieu. The K* released from RBCs in internal bleed- ing, such as hematomas, is resorbed and enters the ECS. Normal doses of succinylcholine or ß blockers and fluoride or digi- talis intoxication all cause a shift of K* out of the intracellular compart- ment. Succinylcholine should not be used during anesthesia in patients at risk for hyperkalemia. ß Blockers prevent the normal cellular uptake of K* mediated by binding of ß-agonists to the B2-adrenergic recep- tors. K* release from muscle cells occurs during exercise, and levels can increase by 1-2 mEq/L with high activity. With an increased plasma osmolality, water moves from the ICS, and K+ follows. This process occurs with hyperglycemia, although in nondiabetic patients the resul- tant increase in insulin causes K+ to move intracellularly. In diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), the absence of insulin causes potassium to leave the ICS, and the problem is compounded by the hyperosmolality. The effect of hyperosmolality causes a transcellular shift of K+ into the ECS Table 73.4 Causes of Hyperkalemia SPURIOUS LABORATORY VALUE Hemolysis Tissue ischemia during blood drawing Thrombocytosis Leukocytosis Familial pseudohyperkalemia (OMIM 609153) INCREASED INTAKE Intravenous or oral Blood transfusions TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS Acidosis Rhabdomyolysis Tumor lysis syndrome Tissue necrosis Hemolysis/hematomas/gastrointestinal bleeding Succinylcholine Digitalis intoxication Fluoride intoxication B-Adrenergic blockers Exercise Hyperosmolality Insulin deficiency Malignant hyperthermia (OMIM 145600/601887/601888) Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (OMIM 170500) DECREASED EXCRETION Kidney failure Primary adrenal disease Acquired Addison disease 21-Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 201910) 3ß-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 201810) Lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia (OMIM 201710) Adrenal hypoplasia congenita (OMIM 300200) Aldosterone synthase deficiency (OMIM 203400/610600) Adrenoleukodystrophy (OMIM 300100) Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism Urinary tract obstruction Sickle cell disease (OMIM 603903) Kidney transplant Lupus nephritis Renal tubular disease Pseudohypoaldosteronism type | (OMIM 264350/177735) Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (OMIM 614491/614492/614495) Bartter syndrome, type 2 (OMIM 241200) Urinary tract obstruction Kidney transplant Renin inhibitors Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors Angiotensin Il blockers Potassium-sparing diuretics Calcineurin inhibitors Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs Trimethoprim Heparin Drospirenone (in some oral contraceptives) OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim). after mannitol or hypertonic saline infusions. Malignant hyperther- mia, which is triggered by some inhaled anesthetics, causes muscle release of potassium (see Chapter 651.2). Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by pathogenic variants in SCN4A, the gene for a Nat channel. It results in episodic cellular release of K* and attacks of paralysis (see Chapter 651.1). 

The kidneys excrete most of the daily K* intake, so a decrease in kid- ney function can cause hyperkalemia. Newborn infants in general, and especially premature infants, have decreased kidney function at birth; thus they are at increased risk for hyperkalemia despite an absence of intrinsic renal disease. Neonates also have decreased expression of K+ channels, further limiting K+ excretion. A wide range of primary adrenal disorders, both hereditary and acquired, can cause decreased production of aldosterone, with secondary hyperkalemia (see Chapters 615 and 616). Patients with these disorders typically have metabolic acidosis and salt wasting with hyponatremia. Children with subtle adrenal insufficiency may have electrolyte problems only during acute illnesses. The most common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 21-hydroxylase deficiency, typically manifests in male infants as hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, hyponatremia, and volume depletion. Females with this disorder usually are diagnosed as newborns because of their ambiguous genitals; treatment prevents the development of electrolyte problems. Renin, via angiotensin II, stimulates aldosterone production. A defi- ciency in renin, a result of kidney damage, can lead to decreased aldoste- rone production. Hyporeninemia occurs in many kidney diseases, with some of the more common pediatric causes listed in Table 73.4. These patients typically have hyperkalemia and a metabolic acidosis, without hyponatremia. Some of these patients have impaired renal function, par- tially accounting for the hyperkalemia, but the impairment in K+ excre- tion is more extreme than expected for the degree of renal insufficiency. A variety of renal tubular disorders impair renal excretion of K+. Children with pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 have hyper- kalemia, metabolic acidosis, and salt wasting (kidney, colon, sweat) leading to hyponatremia and volume depletion; aldosterone values are elevated. In the autosomal recessive variant, there is a defect in the renal Nat channel that is normally activated by aldosterone. Patients with this variant have severe symptoms (failure to thrive, diarrhea, recurrent respiratory infections, miliaria-rubra like rash), beginning in infancy. Patients with the autosomal dominant form have a defect in the aldosterone receptor, and the disease is milder, often remitting in adulthood. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 (familial hyperkalemic hypertension), also called Gordon syn- drome, is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hyper- tension caused by salt retention and impaired excretion of K* and acid, leading to hyperkalemia and hyperchloremic metabolic aci- dosis. Pathogenic variants in at least four genes (WNK4, WNK1, KLHL3, CUL3) may cause Gordon syndrome. Patients may respond well to thiazide diuretics. In Bartter syndrome, caused by patho- genic variants in the potassium channel ROMK (type 2 Bartter syndrome), there can be transient hyperkalemia in neonates, but hypokalemia subsequently develops (see Chapter 571.1). Acquired renal tubular dysfunction, with an impaired ability to excrete K+, occurs in a number of conditions. These disorders, all characterized by tubulointerstitial disease, are often associated with impaired acid secretion and a secondary metabolic acidosis. In some affected children, the metabolic acidosis is the dominant feature, although a high K* intake may unmask the defect in K+ handling. The tubular dysfunction can cause renal salt wasting, potentially leading to hyponatremia. Because of the tubulointerstitial damage, these conditions may also cause hyperka- lemia as a result of hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism. The risk of hyperkalemia resulting from medications is greatest in patients with underlying renal insufficiency. The predominant mechanism of medication-induced hyperkalemia is impaired renal excretion, although ACE inhibitors may worsen hyperkalemia in anuric patients, probably by inhibiting GI potassium loss, which is normally upregulated in renal insufficiency. The hyperkalemia caused by trimethoprim is especially problematic at higher doses. Potassium-sparing diuretics may easily cause hyperkalemia because they are often used in patients receiving oral K* supplements. Oral contraceptives containing drospirenone, which blocks the action of aldosterone, may cause hyperkalemia and should not be used in patients with decreased renal function. Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 497 Clinical Manifestations The most important effects of hyperkalemia result from the role of K* in membrane polarization. The cardiac conduction system is usually the dominant concern. Changes in the electrocardiogram (ECG) begin with peaking of the T waves. This is followed, as K+ level increases, by ST-segment depression, an increased PR interval, flattening of the P wave, and widening of the QRS complex (Fig. 73.4). However, the correlation between K+ level and ECG changes is poor. This process can eventually progress to ventricular fibrilla- tion. Asystole may also occur. Some patients have paresthesias, fas- ciculations, weakness, and even an ascending paralysis, but cardiac toxicity usually precedes these clinical symptoms, emphasizing the danger of assuming that an absence of symptoms implies an absence of danger. Chronic hyperkalemia is generally better tolerated than acute hyperkalemia. Lead V3 B Fig. 73.4 The effects of progressive hyperkalemia on the electrocar- diogram. All of the ECGs are from lead V3. A, Serum potassium concen- tration ((K*)) = 6.8 mEq/L; note the peaked T waves together with nor- mal sinus rhythm. B, Serum [K+] = 8.9 mEq/L; note the peaked T waves and absent P waves. C, Serum [K+] >8.9 mEq/L; note the classic sine wave with absent P waves, marked prolongation of the QRS complex, and peaked T waves. (From Goldman L, Schafer Al, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Elsevier; 2020. Fig. 109.2, p. 727.) 

498 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Diagnosis The etiology of hyperkalemia is often readily apparent. Spurious hyperkalemia is very common in children, so obtaining a second potassium measurement is often appropriate. If there is a signifi- cant elevation of WBC or platelet count, the second measurement should be performed on a plasma sample that is evaluated promptly. The history should initially focus on potassium intake, risk factors for transcellular shifts of K*, medications that cause hyperkalemia, and signs of renal insufficiency, such as oliguria and edema. Initial laboratory evaluation should include creatinine, BUN, and assess- ment of the acid-base status. Many etiologies of hyperkalemia cause metabolic acidosis, which worsens hyperkalemia through the tran- scellular shift of K+ out of cells. Decreased kidney function is a common cause of the combination of metabolic acidosis and hyper- kalemia, also seen in diseases associated with aldosterone insuffi- ciency or aldosterone resistance. Children with absent or ineffective aldosterone often have hyponatremia and volume depletion because of salt wasting. Genetic diseases, such as congenital adrenal hyper- plasia and pseudohypoaldosteronism, usually manifest in infancy and should be strongly considered in the infant with hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis, especially if hyponatremia is present. It is important to consider the various etiologies of a transcel- lular K+ shift. In some of these disorders, the K+ level continues to increase, despite the elimination of all K+ intake, especially with concurrent renal insufficiency. This increase is potentially seen in tumor lysis syndrome, hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, and other causes of cell death. All these entities can cause concomitant hyper- phosphatemia and hyperuricemia. Rhabdomyolysis produces an elevated creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) value and hypocalce- mia, whereas children with hemolysis have hemoglobinuria and a decreasing hematocrit. For the child with diabetes, elevated blood glucose and acidosis suggest a transcellular shift of K+. The plasma K+ level, the ECG, and the risk of the problem worsening determine the aggressiveness of the therapeutic approach. High serum [K*] and the presence of ECG changes require vigorous treatment. An additional source of concern is the patient in whom plasma K+ levels are rising despite minimal intake. This situation can happen if there is cellular release of K* (tumor lysis syndrome), especially in the setting of diminished excretion (kidney failure). The first action in a child with a concerning elevation of plasma [K+ is to stop all sources of additional K* (oral, IV). Washed RBCs can be used for patients who require blood transfusions. If the (K*] is >6.5 mEq/L, an ECG should be obtained to help assess the urgency of the situation. Peaked T waves are the first sign of hyperkalemia, followed by a prolonged PR interval, and when most severe, pro- longed QRS complex. Life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias may also develop. The treatment of hyperkalemia has two basic goals: (1) to stabilize the heart to prevent life-threatening arrhythmias and (2) to remove K+ from the body. The treatments that acutely prevent arrhythmias all have the advantage of working quickly (within minutes) but do not remove K+ from the body. Calcium stabilizes the cell membrane of heart cells, preventing arrhythmias; it is given IV over a few minutes, and its action is almost immedi- ate. Calcium should be given over 30 minutes in a patient receiving digitalis because the calcium may cause arrhythmias. Bicarbonate causes potassium to move intracellularly, lowering the plasma [K*]; it is most efficacious in a patient with a metabolic acidosis. Insulin causes K* to move intracellularly but must be given with glucose to avoid hypoglycemia. The combination of insulin and works within 30 minutes. Nebulized albuterol, by stimulation of ßi-adrenergic receptors, leads to rapid intracellular movement of K*. This has the advantage of not requiring an I route of administration, allowing it to be given concurrently with the other measures. It is critical to begin measures that remove K+ from the body. In patients who are not anuric, a loop diuretic increases renal excretion of K+. A high dose may be required in a patient with significant renal insufficiency. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS; Kayexalate) is an exchange resin that is given either rectally or orally. Patiromer and sodium zirconium cyclosilicate are oral exchange resins for treating hyperkalemia. Some patients require dialysis for acute K* removal. Dialysis is often necessary if the patient has either severe kidney failure or an especially high rate of endogenous K+ release, as is sometimes present with tumor lysis syndrome or rhabdomyolysis. Hemodialysis rapidly lowers plasma [K*]. Peritoneal dialysis is not nearly as quick or reliable, but it is usually adequate as long as the acute problem can be managed with medications and the endogenous release of K* is not Long-term management of hyperkalemia includes reducing intake through dietary changes and eliminating or reducing medications that cause hyperkalemia (see Chapter 572). Some patients require medica- tions to increase potassium excretion, such as SPS, patiromer, sodium zirconium cyclosilicate, and loop or thiazide diuretics. Some infants with chronic kidney disease may need to start dialysis to allow ade- quate caloric intake without hyperkalemia. It is unusual for an older child to require dialysis principally to control chronic hyperkalemia. The disorders caused by aldosterone deficiency respond to replacement therapy with fludrocortisone. HYPOKALEMIA Hypokalemia is common in children, with most cases related to gastroenteritis. Etiology and Pathophysiology There are four basic mechanisms of hypokalemia (Table 73.5). Spuri- ous hypokalemia occurs in patients with leukemia and very elevated WBC counts if plasma for analysis is left at room temperature, permit- ting the WBCs to take up K* from the plasma. With a transcellular shift, there is no change in total body K*, although there may be con- comitant potassium depletion resulting from other factors. Decreased intake, extrarenal losses, and renal losses are all associated with total body K+ depletion. In addition, seasonal pseudo-hypokalemia is seen during warm summer months as a laboratory phenomenon when blood samples are exposed to a warm environment. On immediate retesting, the potassium level is normal. This should not be confused with a pseudo-Bartter syndrome (hypokalemic, hypochloremic, alka- losis) seen in children with cystic fibrosis in a very warm environment due to excessive sweating. Because the intracellular [K*] is much higher than the plasma level, a significant amount of K* can move into cells without greatly changing the intracellular [K*). Alkalemia is one of the more com- mon causes of a transcellular shift. The effect is much greater with a metabolic alkalosis than with a respiratory alkalosis. The impact of exogenous insulin on K+ movement into the cells is substantial in patients with DKA. Endogenous insulin may be the cause when a patient is given a bolus of glucose. Both endogenous (epinephrine in stress) and exogenous (albuterol) ß-adrenergic agonists stimu- late cellular uptake of K*. Theophylline overdose, barium intoxi- cation, administration of cesium chloride (a homeopathic cancer remedy), and toluene intoxication from paint or glue sniffing can cause a transcellular shift hypokalemia, often with severe clinical manifestations. Children with hypokalemic periodic paralysis, a rare autosomal dominant disorder, have acute cellular uptake of K* (see Chapter 651). Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, which is more common in Asians, is an unusual initial manifestation of hyperthy- roidism. Affected patients have dramatic hypokalemia as a result of a transcellular shift of potassium. Hypokalemia can occur during refeeding syndrome (see Chapters 63 and 385.7). Inadequate K+ intake occurs in anorexia nervosa; accompanying bulimia and laxative or diuretic abuse exacerbates the K+ deficiency. 

Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 499 Table 73.5 Causes of Hypokalemia SPURIOUS LABORATORY VALUE High white blood cell count TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS Alkalemia Insulin a-Adrenergic agonists Drugs/toxins (theophylline, barium, toluene, cesium chloride, hydroxychloroquine) Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (OMIM 170400) Thyrotoxic period paralysis Refeeding syndrome DECREASED INTAKE Anorexia nervosa EXTRARENAL LOSSES Diarrhea Laxative abuse Sweating Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate) or clay ingestion RENAL LOSSES With Metabolic Acidosis Distal renal tubular acidosis (OMIM 179800/602722/267300/611590) Proximal renal tubular acidosis (OMIM 604278)* Ureterosigmoidostomy Diabetic ketoacidosis Without Specific Acid-Base Disturbance Tubular toxins: amphotericin, cisplatin, aminoglycosides Interstitial nephritis Diuretic phase of acute tubular necrosis With Metabolic Alkalosis Low urine chloride Emesis or nasogastric suction Chloride-losing diarrhea (OMIM 214700) Cystic fibrosis (OMIM 219700) Low-chloride formula Posthypercapnia Previous loop or thiazide diuretic use High urine chloride and normal blood pressure Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800) Bartter syndrome (OMIM 241200/607364/602522/601678/300971/6 01198/613090) Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200) EAST syndrome (OMIM 612780) Autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia due to RRAGD variant (OMIM not assigned) Loop and thiazide diuretics (current) High urine chloride and high blood pressure Adrenal adenoma or hyperplasia Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (OMIM 103900) Hyperaldosteronism type II (OMIM 605635) Familial hyperaldosteronism type III (OMIM 613677) Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV (OMIM 617027) Renovascular disease Renin-secreting tumor 17B-Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202110) 11ß-Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202010) Cushing syndrome 11B-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 218030) Licorice ingestion Liddle syndrome (OMIM 177200) Early-onset autosomal dominant hypertension with exacerbation in pregnancy (OMIM 605115) Postobstructive diuresis Hypomagnesemia High urine anions (e.g., penicillin or penicillin derivatives) *Most cases of proximal renal tubular acidosis are not caused by this primary genetic disorder. Proximal renal tubular acidosis is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which has multiple etiologies. EAST, Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim). Sweat losses of K+ can be significant during vigorous exercise in a hot climate. Associated volume depletion and hyperaldosteron- ism increase renal losses of K+ (discussed later). Diarrheal fluid has a high concentration of Kt, and hypokalemia because of diarrhea is usually associated with metabolic acidosis resulting from stool losses of bicarbonate. In contrast, normal acid-base balance or mild metabolic alkalosis is seen with laxative abuse. Intake of potassium- binding resins (SPS) or ingestion of clay because of pica increases Urinary potassium wasting may be accompanied by a metabolic acidosis (proximal or distal RTA). In DKA, although it is often associated with normal plasma [K*] from transcellular shifts, there is significant total body K+ depletion from urinary losses because of the osmotic diuresis, and the K+ level may decrease dramatically with insulin therapy (see Chapter 629). Both the polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis and postobstructive diuresis cause transient, highly variable K+ wasting and may be associated with metabolic acidosis. Tubular damage, which occurs either directly from medi- cations or secondary to interstitial nephritis, is often accompanied by other tubular losses, including magnesium, Na*, and water. Such tubular damage may cause a secondary RTA with metabolic acido- sis. Isolated magnesium deficiency causes renal K+ wasting. Peni- cillin is an anion excreted in the urine, resulting in increased K+ excretion because the penicillin anion must be accompanied by a cation. Hypokalemia from penicillin therapy occurs only with the sodium salt of penicillin, not with the potassium salt. Urinary K* wasting is often accompanied by a metabolic alkalo- sis. This condition is usually associated with increased aldosterone, which increases urinary K+ and acid losses, contributing to the hypokalemia and the metabolic alkalosis. Other mechanisms often contribute to both the K* losses and the metabolic alkalosis. With emesis or nasogastric suction, there is gastric loss of Kt, but this is minimal given the low K+ content of gastric fluid, approximately 10 mEq/L. More important is the gastric loss of hydrochloric acid (HCI), leading to metabolic alkalosis and a state of volume deple- tion. The kidney compensates for metabolic alkalosis by excreting bicarbonate in the urine, but there is obligate loss of K* and Nat with the bicarbonate. The volume depletion raises aldosterone lev- els, further increasing urinary K* losses and preventing correction of metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia until the volume depletion is corrected. Urinary chloride (CI) is low as a response to the volume depletion. Because the volume depletion is secondary to Cl loss, this is a state of Cl deficiency. There were cases of Cl deficiency resulting from infant formula deficient in Cl, which caused a metabolic alkalosis with hypo- kalemia and low urine [Cl]. Current infant formula is not deficient in Cl. A similar mechanism occurs in cystic fibrosis because of Cl loss in sweat. In congenital chloride-losing diarrhea, an autosomal recessive 

500 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders disorder, there is high stool loss of Cl, leading to metabolic alkalosis, an unusual sequela of diarrhea. Because of stool K+ losses, Cl defi- ciency, and metabolic alkalosis, patients with congenital chloride- losing diarrhea have hypokalemia. During respiratory acidosis, there is renal compensation, with retention of bicarbonate and excretion of Cl. After the respiratory acidosis is corrected, the patients have Cl deficiency and post- hypercapnic alkalosis with secondary hypokalemia. Patients with Cl deficiency, metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia have a urinary [CI] of <10 mEq/L. Loop and thiazide diuretics lead to hypoka- lemia, metabolic alkalosis, and Cl deficiency. During treatment, these patients have high urine chloride levels resulting from the effect of the diuretic. However, after the diuretics are discontinued there is residual Cl deficiency, the urinary [CI] is appropriately low, and neither the hypokalemia nor the alkalosis resolves until the Cl deficiency is corrected. The combination of metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia, high urine [CI], and normal blood pressure is characteristic of Bartter syn- drome, Gitelman syndrome, and current diuretic use. Patients with any of these conditions have high urinary losses of Cl despite a state of relative volume depletion with secondary hyperaldosteron- ism with high plasma renin. Bartter and Gitelman syndromes are autosomal recessive disorders caused by defects in tubular trans- porters (see Chapter 571). Bartter syndrome is usually associated with hypercalciuria, and often with nephrocalcinosis, whereas chil- dren with Gitelman syndrome have low urinary calcium losses but hypomagnesemia because of urinary magnesium losses. Some patients with Bartter syndrome have hypomagnesemia. A transient antenatal form of Bartter syndrome is associated with severe poly- hydramnios and pathogenic variants in MAGED2. Some patients with hypoparathyroidism and hypocalcemia caused by activating pathogenic variants of the calcium-sensing receptor (autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism) have hypo- kalemia, hypomagnesemia, and metabolic alkalosis. The reason is that activation of the calcium-sensing receptor in the loop of Henle impairs tubular resorption of sodium and chloride, causing volume depletion and secondary hyperaldosteronism. EAST syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathologic variants in the gene for a potassium channel in the kidney, inner ear, and brain, consists of epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubu- lopathy (hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalciuria). In the presence of high aldosterone levels, there is urinary loss of K+, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and elevated urinary [CI]; renal retention of Nat leads to hypertension. Primary hyper- aldosteronism caused by adenoma or hyperplasia is much less common in children than in adults (see Chapters 619 and 620). Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism, an autosomal domi- nant disorder that leads to high levels of aldosterone (but low renin levels), is often diagnosed in childhood, although hypokalemia is not always present. Familial hyperaldosteronism type II, an auto- somal dominant disorder, is due to a gain-of-function variant in CLCN2 that causes increased aldosterone synthesis. Familial hyper- aldosteronism type III, an autosomal dominant disorder, is due to a gain-of-function variant in KCN/5 that causes a dramatic increase in aldosterone synthesis and severe hypertension and hypokalemia. Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV, an autosomal dominant dis- order, is due to a gain-of-function variant in CACNA1H that causes increased aldosterone synthesis. Increased aldosterone levels may also be secondary to increased renin production. Renal artery stenosis leads to hypertension from increased renin and secondary hyperaldosteronism. The increased aldosterone can cause hypokalemia and metabolic alka- losis, although most patients have normal electrolyte levels. Renin- producing tumors, which are extremely rare, can cause hypokalemia. A variety of disorders cause hypertension and hypokalemia with- out increased aldosterone levels. Some are a result of increased levels of mineralocorticoids other than aldosterone. Such increases occur in two forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see Chap- ter 616). In 11ß-hydroxylase deficiency, which is associated with virilization, 11-deoxycorticosterone is elevated, causing variable hypertension and hypokalemia. A similar mechanism, increased 11-deoxycorticosterone, occurs in 17a-hydroxylase deficiency, but patients with this disorder are more uniformly hypertensive and hypokalemic, and they have a defect in sex hormone production. Cushing syndrome, frequently associated with hypertension, less frequently causes metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia, secondary to the mineralocorticoid activity of cortisol. In 116-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency, an autosomal recessive disorder, the enzymatic defect prevents the conversion of cortisol to cortisone in the kidney. Because cortisol binds to and activates the aldosterone receptor, children with this deficiency have all the features of exces- sive mineralocorticoids, including hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis, but low levels of aldosterone and renin. Patients with this disorder, which is also called apparent mineralocorticoid excess, respond to spironolactone therapy, which blocks the min- eralocorticoid receptor. An acquired form of 116-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency occurs from the ingestion of substances that inhibit this enzyme. A classic example is glycyrrhizic acid, which is found in natural licorice. Liddle syndrome is an auto- somal dominant disorder that results from activating pathogenic variants of the distal nephron sodium channel that is normally upregulated by aldosterone. Patients have the characteristics of hyperaldosteronism-hypertension, hypokalemia, and alkalosis— but low serum renin and aldosterone levels. These patients respond to the potassium-sparing diuretics (triamterene and amiloride) that inhibit this sodium channel (see Chapter 571.3). A pathogenic vari- ant in the mineralocorticoid receptor causes early-onset autosomal dominant hypertension with exacerbation in pregnancy. Hypo- kalemia is usually mild but worsens during pregnancy; renin and aldosterone levels are low. Clinical Manifestations The heart and skeletal muscle are especially vulnerable to hypokalemia. ECG changes include a flattened T wave, a depressed ST segment, and the appearance of a U wave, which is located between the T wave (if still visible) and the P wave (Fig. 73.5). Ventricular fibrillation and torsades de pointes may occur, although usually only in the context of underly- ing heart disease. Hypokalemia makes the heart especially susceptible to digitalis-induced arrhythmias, such as supraventricular tachycardia, ventricular tachycardia, and heart block (see Chapter 484). The clinical consequences of hypokalemia in skeletal muscle include muscle weakness and cramps. Paralysis is a possible complication, gen- erally only at [K*] <2.5 mEq/L. It usually starts in the legs and moves to the arms. Respiratory paralysis may require mechanical ventilation. Some patients have rhabdomyolysis; the risk increases with exercise. Hypokalemia slows GI motility. This effect manifests as constipation; with K* levels <2.5 mEq/L, an ileus may occur. Hypokalemia impairs bladder function, potentially leading to urinary retention. Hypokalemia causes polyuria and polydipsia by impairing urinary concentrating ability, which produces nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Hypokalemia stimulates renal ammonia production, an effect that is clinically significant if hepatic failure is present, because the liver can- not metabolize the ammonia. Consequently, hypokalemia may worsen hepatic encephalopathy. Chronic hypokalemia may cause kidney dam- age, including interstitial nephritis and renal cysts. Diagnosis Most causes of hypokalemia are readily apparent from the history. It is important to review the child's diet, GI losses, and medications. Both emesis and diuretic use can be surreptitious. The presence of hyperten- sion suggests excess mineralocorticoid effects or levels. Concomitant electrolyte abnormalities are useful clues. The combination of hypo- kalemia and metabolic acidosis is characteristic of diarrhea and distal and proximal RTA. A concurrent metabolic alkalosis is characteristic of emesis or nasogastric losses, aldosterone excess, use of diuretics, and 

Va Fig. 73.5 The ECG manifestations of hypokalemia. The serum po- tassium concentration was 2.2 mEq/L. The ST segment is prolonged, primarily because of a U wave following the T wave, and the T wave is flattened. (From Goldman L, Schafer Al, eds. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 26th ed. Elsevier; 2020. Fig. 109.1, p 727.) Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 501 K+. The plasma potassium level does not always provide an accurate estimation of the total body K+ deficit because there may be shifts of K+ from the ICS to the plasma. Clinically, such shifts occur most often with metabolic acidosis and the insulin deficiency of DKA; the plasma [K*] measurement underestimates the degree of total body K+ depletion. When these problems are corrected, K* moves into the ICS, so more K* supplementation is required to correct the hypokale- mia. Likewise, the presence of a transcellular shift of K* into the cells indicates that the total body K+ depletion is less severe. In an isolated transcellular shift, as in hypokalemic periodic paralysis, K* supple- mentation should be used cautiously, given the risk of hyperkale- mia when the transcellular shift resolves. This caution is especially required in thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, which responds dramati- cally to propranolol, with correction of weakness and hypokalemia. Patients who have ongoing losses of K+ need correction of the deficit and replacement of the ongoing losses. Because of the risk of hyperkalemia, IV K+ should be used very cau- tiously. Oral K+ is safer, but not as rapid in urgent situations. Liquid preparations are bitter tasting; microencapsulated or wax matrix for- mulations are less irritating than tablets to the gastric mucosa. Oral dosing is variable depending on the clinical situation. A typical starting dose is 1-2 mEq/kg/day, with a maximum of 60 mEq/day in divided doses. The dose of IV potassium is 0.5 - 1.0 mEq/kg, usually given over 1 hour. The adult maximum dose is 40 mEq. Conservative dosing is gen- erally preferred. Potassium chloride is the usual choice for supplemen- tation, although the presence of concurrent electrolyte abnormalities may dictate other options. Patients with acidosis and hypokalemia can receive potassium acetate or potassium citrate. If hypophosphatemia is present, some of the potassium deficit can be replaced with potassium phosphate. It is sometimes possible to decrease ongoing K* losses. For patients with excessive urinary losses, potassium-sparing diuretics are effective, but they need to be used cautiously in patients with decreased kidney function. If hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and volume depletion are present (with gastric losses), restoration of intravascu- lar volume with adequate NaCl will decrease urinary K+ losses. Cor- rection of concurrent hypomagnesemia is important because it may cause hypokalemia. Disease-specific therapy is effective in many of the genetic tubular disorders. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Bartter and Gitelman syndromes. Figure 73.6 shows an approach to persistent hypokalemia. If a clear etiology is not apparent, the measurement of urinary K+ distinguishes between renal and extrarenal losses. The kidneys should conserve K* in the presence of extrarenal losses. Urinary K+ losses can be assessed with a 24-hour urine collection, spot K*:creatinine ratio, fractional excretion of K*, or calculation of the transtubular K* gradi- ent (TTKG), which is the most widely used approach in children: ITKG = [Kurine [K) plasma * (plasma osmolality / urine osmolality) where [Klurine = urine potassium concentration and [KIplasma = plasma potassium concentration. The urine osmolality must be greater than the serum osmolality for the result of this calculation to be valid. A TTKG >4 in the presence of hypokalemia suggests excessive urinary losses of Kt. The urinary K+ excretion value can be misleading if the stimulus for renal loss, such as a diuretic, is no longer present. Treatment Factors that influence the treatment of hypokalemia include the K+ level, clinical symptoms, kidney function, the presence of transcel- lular shifts of Kt, ongoing losses, and the patient's ability to toler- ate oral K+. Severe, symptomatic hypokalemia requires aggressive treatment. Supplementation is more cautious if renal function is decreased because of the kidney's limited ability to excrete excessive 73.5 Magnesium Larry A. Greenbaum MAGNESIUM METABOLISM Body Content and Physiologic Function Magnesium is the fourth most common cation in the body and the third most common intracellular cation (see Fig. 73.3). From 50-60% of body magnesium is in bone, where it serves as a reservoir because 30% is exchangeable, allowing movement to the ECS. Most intracel- lular magnesium is bound to proteins; only approximately 25% is exchangeable. Because cells with higher metabolic rates have higher magnesium concentrations, most intracellular magnesium is present in muscle and liver. The normal plasma magnesium concentration is 1.5-2.3 mg/dL (1.2- 1.9 mEq/L; 0.62-0.94 mmol/L), with some variation among clinical laboratories. Infants have slightly higher plasma magnesium concen- trations than older children and adults. Only 1% of body magnesium is extracellular (60% ionized, 15% complexed, 25% protein bound). In the United States, serum magnesium is reported as mg/dL (Table 73.6). Values in the left-column unit are converted into the right-column unit by multiplying the conversion factor (e.g., calcium of 10 mg/dL x 0.25 = 2.5 mmol/L). Dividing the right-column unit by the conversion fac- tor converts to the units of the left-column unit. 

502 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Hypokalemia* Reduced total body K+ Cellular uptake of K+ Insufficient K+ intake Excessive K+ loss Extra-renal loss (Urine K+ ≤ 15 mEq/L; TTKG ≤ 4) Renal loss (Urine K+ > 15 mEq/L; TTKG > 4) Acute alkalosis Insulin ß-adrenergic stimulants Periodic paralysis Barium poisoning Acute increase in blood cells Metabolic alkalosis Metabolic acidosis Variable acid-base status Sweat loss Gi loss -Pica / geophagia -K+ binders, fistulas -Diarrhea, laxatives Renal tubular acidosis (I and II) Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors Ureterosigmoid diversion Diabetic ketoacidosis Urine CI- ≤ 15 Urine CI - > 15 Drugs (antibiotics, etc.) Polyuric disorders Saline diuresis (K+- free) Magnesium depletion Congenital K+ wasting Acquired K+ wasting Leukemia CI- Deficient diet GI CI - loss (emesis / NG drainage) Sweat CI- loss Post-hypercapnea Post-diuretic effect Hypertension Low / normal BP - PRA ≤ 0.5 ng/mL/hr; DR ≤ 15 mU/L PRA > 0.5 ng/mL/hr; DR > 15 mU/L Recent diuretic effect Bartter syndrome Gitelman syndrome Hypovolemia Renal parenchymal disease Renovascular disease Renal compression Renal tumors Pheochromocytoma Excess ACTH / Glucocorticoids** High aldosterone Low / Normal DOC Variable aldosterone High DOC Low aldosterone Low / Normal DOC Primary aldosteronism - tumors, hyperplasia - GRA (FH-I), FH-II AME, licorice, Carbenoxolone Chronic grapefruit juice intake Liddle syndrome (PA-l) MR activating mutation (PA-II) Exogenous mineralocorticoid Excess ACTH / Glucocorticoids** High 17-OHP Low cortisol High ACTH Low / normal 17-OHP Low cortisol High ACTH High 17-OHP High cortisol High ACTH Normal 17-OHP Normal cortisol Normal ACTH 11-$ hydroxylase deficiency 17-a. hydroxylase deficiency GR resistance DOC-secreting tumors Fig. 73.6 Diagnostic algorithm to evaluate persistent hypokalemia. *Spurious hypokalemia must be excluded. **Hypokalemia is uncommon in uncomplicated edematous disorders and in conditions associated with excessive glucocorticosteroids. Conditions associated with high circulat- ing levels of glucocorticosteroids often have normal renin activity. 17-OHP, 17-Hydroxyprogesterone; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; AME, apparent mineralocorticoid excess; BP, blood pressure; Cl-, chloride; DOC, 11-deoxycorticosterone; DR, direct renin assay; Gl, gastrointestinal; FH-II, familial hyperaldosteronism type II; GR, glucocorticoid receptor; GRA (FH-I), glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism (familial hyperaldo- steronism type l); K+, potassium; MR, mineralocorticoid receptor; PA-I, pseudohyperaldosteronism type I; PA-II, pseudohyperaldosteronism type II; PRA, plasma renin activity; TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient. (From Shoemaker LR, Eaton BV, Buchino JJ. A three-year-old with persistent hypokalemia. J Pediatr. 2007;151(6):696-699.) Magnesium is a necessary cofactor for hundreds of enzymes. It is important for membrane stabilization and nerve conduction. Adenos- ine triphosphate (ATP) and guanosine triphosphate need associated magnesium when they are used by ATPases, cyclases, and kinases. Magnesium Intake Between 30% and 50% of dietary magnesium is absorbed. Good dietary sources include green vegetables, cereals, nuts, meats, and hard water, although many foods contain magnesium. Human milk contains approximately 35 mg/L of magnesium; formula contains 40-70 mg/L. The small intestine is the major site of magnesium absorption, but the regulation of magnesium absorption is poorly understood. There is passive absorption, which permits high absorption in the presence of excessive intake. It probably occurs by a paracellular mechanism. Absorption is diminished in the presence of substances that complex with magnesium (free fatty acids, fiber, phytate, phosphate, oxalate); increased intestinal motility and calcium also decrease magnesium absorption. Vitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH) may enhance absorption, although this effect is limited. Intestinal absorption does increase when intake is decreased, possibly by a saturable, active trans- port system. If there is no oral intake of magnesium, obligatory secre- tory losses prevent the complete elimination of intestinal losses. Magnesium Excretion Renal excretion is the principal regulator of magnesium balance. There is no defined hormonal regulatory system, although PTH may increase 

tubular resorption. Approximately 15% of resorption occurs in the proximal tubule and 70% in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the loop of Henle. Proximal resorption may be higher in neonates. High serum magnesium levels inhibit resorption in the TAL, suggesting that active transport is involved. Approximately 5-10% of filtered magnesium is resorbed in the distal tubule. Hypomagnesemia increases absorption in the TAL and the distal tubule. HYPOMAGNESEMIA Hypomagnesemia is relatively common in hospitalized patients, although most cases are asymptomatic. Detection requires a high index of suspicion because magnesium is not measured in most basic meta- bolic panels. Table 73.6 Calcium Magnesium Phosphorus Conversion Factors for Calcium, Magnesium, and Phosphorus UNIT mg/dL mEq/L mg/dL mg/dL mEq/L mg/dL mg/dL CONVERSION FACTOR 0.25 0.5 0.5 0.411 0.5 0.822 0.32 UNIT mmol/L mmol/L mEq/L mmol/L mmol/L mEq/L mmol/L Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 503 Etiology and Pathophysiology GI and renal losses are the major causes of hypomagnesemia (Table 73.7). Diarrheal fluid contains up to 200 mg/L of magnesium; gastric contents have only approximately 15 mg/L, but high losses can cause depletion. Steatorrhea causes magnesium loss because of the formation of magnesium-lipid salts; restriction of dietary fat can decrease losses. The potassium-lowering agent patiromer binds magnesium and may cause hypomagnesemia. Hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia, a rare autoso- mal recessive disorder, is caused by decreased intestinal absorption of magnesium and renal magnesium wasting. Patients with this disorder have pathogenic variants in a gene expressed in intestine and kidney; TRPM6 codes for a transient receptor potential cation channel. The patients have seizures, tetany, tremor, or restlessness at 2-8 weeks of life because of severe hypomagnesemia (0.2-0.8 mg/dL) and secondary hypocalcemia. Renal losses may occur because of medications that are direct tubu- lar toxins. Amphotericin frequently causes significant magnesium wasting and is typically associated with other tubular defects (espe- cially potassium wasting). Cisplatin produces dramatic renal mag- nesium losses. Diuretics affect tubular handling of magnesium. Loop diuretics cause a mild increase in magnesium excretion, and thiazide diuretics have even less effect. Chronic use of proton pump inhibi- tors (PPIs) may cause hypomagnesemia. Potassium-sparing diuretics reduce magnesium losses. Osmotic agents, such as mannitol, glucose in diabetes mellitus, and urea in the recovery phase of acute tubular necrosis, increase urinary magnesium losses. Epidermal growth fac- tor (EGF) receptor inhibitors cause renal magnesium wasting. IV fluid, by expanding the intravascular volume, decreases renal resorption of Table 73.7 Causes of Hypomagnesemia GASTROINTESTINAL LOSSES Diarrhea Nasogastric suction or emesis Inflammatory bowel disease Celiac disease Cystic fibrosis Intestinal lymphangiectasia Small bowel resection or bypass Pancreatitis Protein-calorie malnutrition Patiromer Hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia (OMIM 602014)* RENAL DISORDERS Medications Amphotericin Cisplatin Cyclosporine, tacrolimus Loop and thiazide diuretics Mannitol Pentamidine Proton pump inhibitors Aminoglycosides Thiazide diuretics Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors Diabetes Acute tubular necrosis (recovery phase) Postobstructive nephropathy Chronic kidney diseases Interstitial nephritis Glomerulonephritis Post-renal transplantation Hypercalcemia Intravenous fluids Primary aldosteronism Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800) Bartter syndrome (OMIM 241200/607364/602522/601678/300971/6 01198/613090) Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis (OMIM 248250) Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and severe ocular involvement (OMIM 248190) Autosomal recessive renal magnesium wasting with normocalciuria (OMIM 611718) Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome due to HNF1ß variants (OMIM 137920) Autosomal dominant hypomagnesemia (OMIM 160120/613882/154020) EAST syndrome (OMIM 612780) Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200) Mitochondrial disorders (OMIM 500005) Hyperuricemia, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure in infancy and alkalosis, HUPRA syndrome (OMIM 613845) Transient neonatal hyperphenylalaninemia followed by hypomagnesemia and maturity onset diabetes of the young (OMIM 264070) Hypomagnesemia, seizures and mental retardation due to CNNM2 pathogenic variants (OMIM 616418) Autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia due to RRAGD pathogenic variants (OMIM not assigned) MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES Poor intake Hungry bone syndrome Insulin administration Pancreatitis Intrauterine growth restriction Infants of diabetic mothers Exchange transfusion *This disorder is also associated with renal magnesium wasting. EAST, Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim). 

504 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders sodium and water, thereby impairing magnesium resorption. Hyper- calcemia inhibits magnesium resorption in the loop of Henle, although this inhibition does not occur in hypercalcemia caused by familial hypercalcemic hypocalciuria or lithium. A number of rare genetic diseases cause renal magnesium loss. Gitelman and Bartter syndromes, both autosomal recessive disor- ders, are the most common entities (see Chapter 571). Gitelman syndrome, caused by a defect in the thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl- co- transporter in the distal tubule, is usually associated with hypomag- nesemia. Hypomagnesemia occurs in a minority of patients with Bartter syndrome, which can be caused by pathogenic variants in multiple genes necessary for Nat and Cl reabsorption in the loop of Henle. In both disorders, there is hypokalemic metabolic alkalo- sis. Typically, hypomagnesemia is not severe and is asymptomatic, although tetany as a result of hypomagnesemia occasionally occurs. Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephro- calcinosis (Michelis-Castrillo syndrome), an autosomal recessive disorder, is caused by pathogenic variants in the gene for claudin 16 (paracellin-1), located in the tight junctions of the TAL of the loop of Henle. Patients with the disease have severe renal wasting of magnesium and calcium with secondary hypomagnesemia and nephrocalcinosis; serum calcium levels are normal. Chronic kidney failure frequently occurs during childhood. Other features include kidney stones, urinary tract infections, hematuria, increased PTH levels, tetany, seizures, incomplete distal RTA, hyperuricemia, poly- uria, and polydipsia. Patients with familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and severe ocular involvement have pathogenic variants in the gene for claudin 19. Autosomal recessive renal magnesium wasting with normocalci- uria is caused by pathogenic variants in the EGF gene. Clinical mani- festations include seizures, mild to moderate psychomotor retardation, Autosomal dominant renal magnesium wasting is caused by pathogenic variants in a number of different genes. A dominant- negative pathogenic variant in the gene encoding the Na*,K*- ATPase y subunit is associated with hypomagnesemia, increased urinary magnesium losses, hypocalciuria, and Patients may present with seizures; most are asymptomatic, despite serum magnesium levels of 0.8-1.5 mg/dL. Pathogenic variants in CNNM2, which encodes a protein that mediates magnesium- sensitive sodium currents, cause isolated hypomagnesemia. A pathogenic variant in KCNA1, a gene that encodes a K* channel, also causes an autosomal dominant form of hypomagnesemia; symptoms may be severe. Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome, which is caused by patho- genic variants in the gene for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1ß, is associated with hypomagnesemia, despite the frequent presence of decreased kidney function. The hypomagnesemia is usually mild but may cause symptomatic hypocalcemia. EAST syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in a potassium channel, and patients with this autosomal recessive disorder have hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and hypomagnesemia. Pathogenic variants of RRAGD cause autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia, patients may have hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and a severe cardiomyopathy. Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism is caused by an activating pathogenic variant in the calcium-sensing receptor, which also senses magnesium levels in the kidney (see Chapter 611). The abnormal receptor inappropriately perceives that magnesium and calcium levels are elevated, leading to urinary wast- ing of both cations. Hypomagnesemia, if present, is usually mild. A pathogenic variant in a mitochondrially encoded transfer RNA is associated with hypomagnesemia, hypertension, and hypercho- lesterolemia. Hypomagnesemia is occasionally present in children with other mitochondrial disorders. Poor intake is an unusual cause of hypomagnesemia, although it can be seen in children who are hospitalized and receive only IV fluids without magnesium. In hungry bone syndrome, which most frequently occurs after parathyroidectomy in patients with hyper- parathyroidism, magnesium moves into bone as a result of acceler- ated bone formation. These patients usually have hypocalcemia and hypophosphatemia through the same mechanism. A similar mecha- nism can occur during the refeeding phase of protein-calorie mal- nutrition in children, with high magnesium use during cell growth depleting the patient's limited reserves. Insulin therapy stimulates uptake of magnesium by cells, and in DKA, in which total body magnesium is low because of osmotic losses, hypomagnesemia fre- quently occurs. In pancreatitis there is saponification of magne- sium and calcium in necrotic fat, causing both hypomagnesemia and hypocalcemia. Transient hypomagnesemia in newborns, which is sometimes idio- pathic, is more common in infants of diabetic mothers, presumably as a result of maternal depletion from osmotic losses. Other maternal dis- eases that cause magnesium losses predispose infants to hypomagne- semia. Hypomagnesemia is more common in infants with intrauterine growth restriction. Hypomagnesemia may develop in newborn infants who require exchange transfusions because of magnesium removal by the citrate in banked blood. Clinical Manifestations Hypomagnesemia causes secondary hypocalcemia by impairing the release of PTH by the parathyroid gland and through blunting of the tissue response to PTH. Thus hypomagnesemia is part of the differen- tial diagnosis of hypocalcemia. It usually occurs only at magnesium levels <0.7 mg/dL. The dominant manifestations of hypomagnesemia are caused by hypocalcemia: tetany, presence of Chvostek and Trous- seau signs, and seizures. However, with severe hypomagnesemia, these same signs and symptoms may be present despite normocalcemia. Persistent hypocalcemia caused by hypomagnesemia is a rare cause of rickets. Many causes of hypomagnesemia also result in hypokalemia. Hypo- magnesemia may produce renal potassium wasting and hypokalemia that corrects only with magnesium therapy. ECG changes with hypo- magnesemia include flattening of the T wave and lengthening of the ST segment. Arrhythmias may occur, almost always in the setting of underlying heart disease. Diagnosis The etiology of hypomagnesemia is often readily apparent from the clinical situation. The child should be assessed for GI disease, adequate intake, and kidney disease, with close attention paid to medications that may cause renal magnesium wasting. When the diagnosis is uncertain, an evaluation of urinary magnesium losses distinguishes between renal and nonrenal causes. The fractional excretion of magnesium (FEmg) is FEMg = (Umg X Pcs) / ([0.7 x PMg) X Ucr) × 100 where Umg = urinary magnesium concentration, Pcr = plasma cre- atinine concentration, Pg = plasma magnesium concentration, and Ucr = urinary magnesium concentration. The plasma magnesium con- centration is multiplied by 0.7 because approximately 30% is bound to albumin and not filtered at the glomerulus. The FEMg does not vary with age, but it does change according to the serum magnesium concentration. The FEmg ranges from 1-8% in children with normal magnesium levels. In the patient with hypomag- nesemia as a result of extrarenal causes, FEMg should be low because of renal conservation, typically <2%. The FEmg is inappropriately elevated in the setting of renal magnesium wasting; values are usually >4% and frequently > 10%. The measurement should not be made during a magnesium infusion, because the acute increase in serum magnesium increases urinary magnesium. Other approaches for evaluating urinary magnesium losses include calculation of 24-hour urinary magnesium losses and the urine magnesium/creatinine ratio, both of which vary with age. 

The genetic causes of renal magnesium loss are distinguished based on the measurement of other serum and urinary electrolytes. Children with Gitelman or Bartter syndrome have hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Severe hypomagnesemia is treated with parenteral magnesium. Magnesium sulfate is given at a dose of 25-50 mg/kg (0.05-0.1 mL/ kg of a 50% solution; 2.5-5.0 mg/kg of elemental magnesium). It is administered as a slow IV infusion, although it may be given intra- muscularly in neonates. The rate of IV infusion should be slowed if a patient experiences diaphoresis, flushing, or a warm sensa- tion. The dose is often repeated every 6 hours (every 8-12 hours in neonates), for a total of 2-3 doses, before the plasma magnesium concentration is rechecked. Lower doses are used in children with decreased kidney function. Long-term therapy is usually given orally. Preparations include magnesium gluconate (5.4 mg elemental magnesium/100 magnesium oxide (60 mg elemental magnesium/100 mg), and magnesium sulfate (10 mg elemental Sustained-release preparations include Slow-Mag (60 mg elemen- tal magnesium/tablet) and Mag-Tab SR (84 mg elemental magne- sium/tablet). Oral magnesium dosing should be divided to decrease cathartic side effects. Alternatives to oral magnesium are intramus- cular injections and nighttime nasogastric infusion, both designed to minimize diarrhea. Magnesium supplementation must be used cautiously in the context of renal insufficiency. HYPERMAGNESEMIA Clinically significant hypermagnesemia is almost always secondary to excessive intake. It is unusual, except in neonates born to mothers who are receiving IV magnesium for preeclampsia or eclampsia (see Chap- ter 121.5). Etiology and Pathophysiology acids. It is also usually present in total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and neonates may receive high amounts transplacentally if mater- nal levels are elevated. Usually the kidneys excrete excessive magne- sium, but this ability is diminished in patients with chronic kidney disease. In addition, neonates and young infants are vulnerable to excessive magnesium ingestion because of their reduced GFR. Most pediatric cases not related to maternal hypermagnesemia occur in infants because of excessive use of antacids or laxatives. Mild hypermagnesemia may occur in chronic kidney disease, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, DKA, lithium ingestion, milk-alkali syndrome, and tumor lysis syndrome. The hypermagnesemia in DKA occurs despite significant intracellular magnesium depletion because of urinary losses; hypomagnesemia often occurs after insu- lin treatment. Clinical Manifestations Symptoms usually do not appear until the plasma magnesium level is >4.5 mg/dL. Hypermagnesemia inhibits acetylcholine release at the neuromuscular junction, producing hypotonia, hyporeflexia, and weakness; paralysis occurs at high concentrations. The neuro- muscular effects may be exacerbated by aminoglycoside antibiot- ics. Direct CNS depression causes lethargy and sleepiness; infants have a poor suck. Elevated magnesium values are associated with hypotension because of vascular dilation, which also causes flush- ing. Hypotension can be profound at higher concentrations from a direct effect on cardiac function. ECG changes include prolonged PR interval, QRS complex, and QT interval. Severe hypermagne- semia (>15 mg/dL) causes complete heart block and cardiac arrest. Other manifestations of hypermagnesemia include nausea, vomit- ing, and hypocalcemia. Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 505 Diagnosis Except for the case of the neonate with transplacental exposure, a high index of suspicion and a good history are necessary to determine the etiology of hypermagnesemia. Prevention is essential; magnesium- containing compounds should be used judiciously in children with decreased kidney function. Treatment Most patients with normal kidney function rapidly clear excess mag- nesium. Intravenous hydration and loop diuretics can accelerate this process. In severe cases, especially in patients with underlying renal insufficiency, dialysis may be necessary. Hemodialysis works faster than peritoneal dialysis. Exchange transfusion is another option in newborn infants. Supportive care includes monitoring of cardiorespi- ratory status, provision of fluids, monitoring of electrolyte levels, and the use of pressors for hypotension. In acute emergencies, especially in the context of severe neurologic or cardiac manifestations, 100 mg/kg of IV calcium gluconate is transiently effective. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 73.6 Phosphorus Larry A. Greenbaum Approximately 65% of plasma phosphorus is in phospholipids, but these compounds are insoluble in acid and are not measured by clinical laboratories. It is the phosphorus content of plasma phosphate that is determined. The result is reported as either phosphate or phosphorus, although even when the term phosphate is used, it is actually the phos- phorus concentration that is measured and reported. The result is that the terms phosphate and phosphorus are often used interchangeably. The term phosphorus is preferred when referring to the plasma concen- tration. Conversion from the units used in the United States (mg/dL) to mmol/L is straightforward (see Table 73.6). PHOSPHORUS METABOLISM Body Content and Physiologic Function Most phosphorus is in bone or is intracellular, with <1% in plasma. At a physiologic pH, there are monovalent and divalent forms of phos- phate because the pKa (ionization constant of acid) of these forms is 6.8. Approximately 80% is divalent, and the remainder is monovalent at a pH of 7.4. A small percentage of plasma phosphate, approximately 15%, is protein bound. The remainder can be filtered by the glomeru- lus, with most existing as free phosphate and a small percentage com- plexed with calcium, magnesium, or sodium. Phosphate is the most plentiful intracellular anion, although the majority is part of a larger compound (ATP). More than that of any other electrolyte, the phosphorus concentra- tion varies with age (Table 73.8). The teleologic explanation for the high concentration during childhood is the need for phosphorus to facilitate growth. There is diurnal variation in the plasma phosphorus concentration, with the peak during sleep. Table 73.8 AGE 0-5 day 1-3 yr 4-11 yr 12-15yr 16-19 yr Serum Phosphorus Levels During Childhood PHOSPHORUS LEVEL (mg/dL) 4.8-8.2 3.8-6.5 3.7-5.6 2.9-5.4 2.7-4.7 

506 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Phosphorus, as a component of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and other trinucleotides, is critical for cellular energy metabolism. It is nec- essary for cell signaling and nucleic acid synthesis, and it is a com- ponent of cell membranes and other structures. Along with calcium, phosphorus is necessary for skeletal mineralization. A net positive phosphorus balance is required during growth, with the growing skel- eton especially vulnerable to deficiency. Phosphorus Intake Phosphorus is readily available in food. Milk and milk products are the best sources of phosphorus; high concentrations are present in meat and fish. Vegetables have more phosphorus than fruits and grains. GI absorption of phosphorus is proportional to intake, with approxi- mately 65% of intake being absorbed, including a small amount that is secreted. Absorption, almost exclusively in the small intestine, occurs via a paracellular diffusive process and a vitamin D-regulated trans- cellular pathway. However, the impact of the change in phosphorus absorption caused by vitamin D is relatively small compared with the effect of variations in phosphorus intake. Phosphorus Excretion Despite the wide variation in phosphorus absorption dictated by oral intake, excretion matches intake, except for the needs for growth. The kidney regulates phosphorus balance, which is deter- mined by intrarenal mechanisms and hormonal actions on the Approximately 90% of plasma phosphate is filtered at the glomeru- lus, although there is some variation based on plasma phosphate and calcium concentrations. There is no significant secretion of phosphate along the nephron. Resorption of proximal tubule, although a small amount can be resorbed in the distal tubule. Normally, approximately 85% of the filtered load is resorbed. Sodium-phosphate co-transporters mediate the uptake of phosphate into the cells of the proximal tubule. Dietary phosphorus determines the amount of phosphate resorbed by the nephron. There are both acute and chronic changes in phos- phate resorption that are based on intake. Many of these changes appear to be mediated by intrarenal mechanisms that are indepen- dent of regulatory hormones. Fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF-23) inhibits renal resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule, and its level increases in the setting of hyperphosphatemia. FGF-23 also inhibits synthesis of 1,25-vitamin D in the kidney by decreasing la- hydroxylase activity. Secreted in response to a low plasma calcium level, PTH decreases resorption of phosphate, increasing the urinary phosphate level. This process appears to have a minimal effect during normal physiologic variation in PTH levels. However, it does affect urinary phosphate in the setting of pathologic changes in PTH synthesis. Low plasma phosphorus stimulates the la-hydroxylase in the kidney that converts 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-D) to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25-D; calcitriol). Calcitriol increases intestinal absorption of phos- phorus and is necessary for maximal renal resorption of phosphate. The effect of a change in calcitriol on urinary phosphate is significant only when the level of calcitriol was initially low, arguing against a role for calcitriol in nonpathologic conditions. HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA Because of the wide variation in normal plasma phosphorus levels, the definition of hypophosphatemia is age dependent (see Table 73.8). The normal range reported by a laboratory may be based on adult normal values and therefore may be misleading in children. A serum phos- phorus level of 3 mg/dL, a normal value in an adult, indicates clinically significant hypophosphatemia in an infant. The plasma phosphorus level does not always reflect the total body stores because only 1% of phosphorus is extracellular. Thus a child may have significant phosphorus deficiency despite a normal plasma phosphorus concentration when there is a shift of phosphorus from Etiology and Pathophysiology A variety of mechanisms cause hypophosphatemia (Table 73.9). A transcellular shift of phosphorus into cells occurs with processes that stimulate cellular usage of phosphorus (glycolysis). Usually, this shift causes only a minor, transient decrease in plasma phosphorus, but if intracellular phosphorus deficiency is present, the plasma phosphorus level can decrease significantly, producing symptoms of acute hypo- phosphatemia. Glucose infusion stimulates insulin release, leading to entry of glucose and phosphorus into the cells. Phosphorus is then used during glycolysis and other metabolic processes. A similar phenomenon can occur during the treatment of DKA, and patients with DKA are typi- cally phosphorus depleted because of urinary phosphorus losses. Table 73.9 Causes of Hypophosphatemia TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS Glucose infusion Insulin Refeeding Total parenteral nutrition Respiratory alkalosis Tumor growth Bone marrow transplantation Hungry bone syndrome DECREASED INTAKE Nutritional Premature infants Low phosphorus formula Antacids and other phosphate binders RENAL LOSSES Hyperparathyroidism Parathyroid hormone-related peptide X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (OMIM 307800) Overproduction of fibroblast growth factor-23 Tumor-induced rickets McCune-Albright syndrome (OMIM 174800) Epidermal nevus syndrome Neurofibromatosis Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (OMIM 193100) Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets, types 1, 2, and 3 (OMIM 241520/613312) Ferric carboxymaltose Dent disease (OMIM 300009/300555) Fanconi syndrome (OMIM 134600/613388/615605/616026/618913/ 612392)* Hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (OMIM 241530) Hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis types 1 and 2 (OMIM 612286/612287) Volume expansion and intravenous fluids Metabolic acidosis Diuretics Glycosuria Glucocorticoids Chemotherapy (cisplatin, ifosfamide) Kidney transplantation MULTIFACTORIAL Vitamin D deficiency Vitamin D-dependent rickets type 1 (OMIM 264700) Vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2 (OMIM 277440) Alcoholism Sepsis Dialysis *These are primary genetic causes of Fanconi syndrome. Fanconi syndrome may also be secondary to medications, genetic disorders (cystinosis) or systemic disease (Sjögren syndrome). OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim). 

Refeeding of patients with protein-calorie malnutrition causes anabolism, which leads to significant cellular demand for phospho- rus (see Chapter 63). The increased phosphorus uptake for incorpo- ration into newly synthesized compounds containing phosphorus leads to hypophosphatemia, which can be severe and symptomatic. Refeeding hypophosphatemia occurs frequently during treat- ment of severe anorexia nervosa. It can occur during treatment of children with malnutrition from any cause, such as cystic fibrosis, Crohn disease, burns, neglect, chronic infection, or famine. Hypo- phosphatemia usually occurs within the first 5 days of refeeding and is prevented by a gradual increase in nutrition with appropriate phosphorus supplementation. TPN without adequate phosphorus can cause hypophosphatemia. Phosphorus moves into the ICS during a respiratory alkalosis and during recovery from a respiratory acidosis. An acute decrease in the carbon dioxide concentration, by raising the intracellular pH, stimulates glycolysis, leading to intracellular use of phosphorus and hypophosphatemia. Because a metabolic alkalosis has less effect on the intracellular pH (CO, diffuses across cell membranes much faster than bicarbonate), transcellular phosphorus movement is minimal with a metabolic alkalosis. Tumors that grow rapidly, such as those associated with leuke- mia and lymphoma, may use large amounts of phosphorus, leading to hypophosphatemia. A similar phenomenon may occur during the hematopoietic reconstitution that follows bone marrow trans- plantation. In hungry bone syndrome, there is avid bone uptake of phosphorus, along with calcium and magnesium, which can pro- duce plasma deficiency of all three ions. Hungry bone syndrome is most common after parathyroidectomy for hyperparathyroidism because the stimulus for bone dissolution is acutely removed, but bone synthesis continues. Nutritional phosphorus deficiency is unusual because most foods contain phosphorus. However, infants are especially susceptible because of their high demand for phosphorus to support growth, especially of the skeleton. Very low birthweight infants have partic- ularly rapid skeletal growth, and phosphorus deficiency and rickets may develop if they are fed human milk or formula for term infants. There is also a relative deficiency of calcium. The provision of addi- tional calcium and phosphorus, using breast milk fortifier or special premature infant formula, prevents this complication. Phosphorus deficiency, sometimes with concomitant calcium and vitamin D deficiencies, occurs in infants who are not given enough milk or who receive a milk substitute that is nutritionally inadequate. Antacids containing aluminum hydroxide (e.g., Mylanta) bind dietary phosphorus and secreted phosphorus, pre- venting absorption. This process can cause phosphorus deficiency and rickets in growing children. A similar mechanism causes hypo- phosphatemia in patients who are overtreated for hyperphosphate- mia with phosphorus binders. In children with kidney failure, the addition of dialysis to phosphorus binders increases the risk of iat- rogenic hypophosphatemia in these normally hyperphosphatemic patients. This complication, which is more common in infants, can worsen kidney osteodystrophy. Excessive renal losses of phosphorus occur in a variety of inher- ited and acquired disorders. Because PTH inhibits the resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule, hyperparathyroidism causes hypophosphatemia (see Chapter 613). The dominant clinical mani- festation, however, is hypercalcemia, and the hypophosphatemia is usually asymptomatic. The phosphorus level in hyperparathyroid- ism is not extremely low, and there is no continued loss of phos- phorus because a new steady state is achieved at the lower plasma phosphorus level. Renal excretion therefore does not exceed intake over the long term. Occasional malignancies produce PTH-related peptide, which has the same actions as PTH and causes hypophos- phatemia and hypercalcemia. A variety of diseases cause renal phosphate wasting, hypophos- phatemia, and rickets resulting from excess FGF-23 (see Chapter Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 507 69). These disorders include X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets, tumor-induced osteomalacia, autosomal dominant hypophospha- temic rickets, and autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets types 1-3. Ferric carboxymaltose, an IV iron preparation for cor- recting iron deficiency, causes hypophosphatemia via increased levels of FGF-23. Fanconi syndrome is a generalized defect in the proximal tubule leading to urinary wasting of bicarbonate, phosphorus, amino acids, uric acid, and glucose (see Chapter 569.1). The clinical sequelae result from the metabolic acidosis and hypophosphatemia. In children, an underlying genetic disease, usually cystinosis, often causes Fanconi syndrome, but it can be secondary to a variety of toxins and acquired diseases. Some patients have incomplete Fanconi syndrome, and phosphorus wasting may be one of the manifestations. Dent disease, an X-linked disorder, can cause renal phosphorus wasting and hypophosphatemia, although the latter is not pres- ent in most cases. Other possible manifestations of Dent disease include tubular proteinuria, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, rick- ets, and decreased kidney function. Dent disease may be secondary to pathologic variants in a gene that encodes a chloride channel or the OCRL1 gene, which may also cause Lowe syndrome (see Chapter 569.1). Hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, principally described in kin- dreds from the Middle East (see Chapter 69). Pathologic variants in a sodium-phosphate co-transporter cause hypophosphatemia in this disorder, and complications may include nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis. Similar findings are seen in hypophosphatemic rick- ets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis types 1 and 2 (see Chap- Metabolic acidosis inhibits resorption of phosphorus in the prox- imal tubule. In addition, metabolic acidosis causes a transcellular shift of phosphorus out of cells because of intracellular catabolism. This released phosphorus is subsequently lost in the urine, lead- ing to significant phosphorus depletion, even though the plasma phosphorus level may be normal. This classically occurs in DKA, in which renal phosphorus loss is further increased by the osmotic diuresis. With correction of the metabolic acidosis and the adminis- tration of insulin, both of which cause a transcellular movement of phosphorus into the cells, there is a marked decrease in the plasma phosphorus level. Volume expansion from any cause, such as hyperaldosteronism or SIADH, inhibits resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule. This effect also occurs with high rates of IV fluids. Thiazide and loop diuret- ics can increase renal phosphorus excretion, but the increase is seldom clinically significant. Glycosuria and glucocorticoids inhibit renal conservation of phosphorus. Hypophosphatemia is common after kidney transplantation because of urinary phosphorus losses. Pos- sible explanations include preexisting secondary hyperparathyroidism from chronic kidney disease, glucocorticoid therapy, and upregula- tion of FGF-23 before transplantation. The hypophosphatemia usually Both acquired and genetic causes of vitamin D deficiency are associated with hypophosphatemia (see Chapter 69). The pathogen- esis is multifactorial. By impairing intestinal calcium absorption, vita- min D defciency causes secondary hyperparathyroidism that leads to increased urinary phosphorus wasting. An absence of vitamin D decreases intestinal absorption of phosphorus and directly decreases renal resorption of phosphorus. The dominant clinical manifestation is rickets, although some patients have muscle weakness that may be related to phosphorus deficiency. Alcoholism is the most common cause of severe hypophosphate- mia in adults. Fortunately, many of the risk factors that predispose alcoholic adults to hypophosphatemia are not usually present in adolescents (malnutrition, antacid abuse, recurrent DKA episodes). Hypophosphatemia often occurs in sepsis, but the mechanism is not clear. Aggressive, protracted hemodialysis, as might be used for 

508 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders the treatment of methanol or ethylene glycol ingestion, can cause hypophosphatemia. Clinical Manifestations There are acute and chronic manifestations of hypophosphatemia. Rickets occurs in children with long-term phosphorus deficiency. The clinical features of rickets are described in Chapter 69. in maintaining adequate cellular energy. Phosphorus is a component of ATP and is necessary for glycolysis. With inadequate phosphorus, 2,3-diphosphoglycerate levels in RBCs decrease, impairing release of oxygen to the tissues. Severe hypophosphatemia can cause hemolysis and dysfunction of WBCs. Chronic hypophosphatemia causes proxi- mal muscle weakness and atrophy. In the intensive care unit, phos- phorus deficiency may slow weaning from mechanical ventilation or cause acute respiratory failure. Rhabdomyolysis is the most common complication of acute hypophosphatemia, usually in the setting of an acute transcellular shift of phosphorus into cells in a child with chronic phosphorus depletion (anorexia nervosa). The rhabdomyolysis is actu- ally somewhat protective, in that cellular release of phosphorus occurs. Other manifestations of severe hypophosphatemia include cardiac dys- function and neurologic symptoms, such as tremor, paresthesia, ataxia, seizures, delirium, and coma. Diagnosis The history and basic laboratory evaluation often suggest the etiol- ogy of hypophosphatemia. The history should investigate nutrition, medications, and familial disease. Hypophosphatemia and rickets in an otherwise healthy young child suggest a genetic defect in renal phosphorus conservation, Fanconi syndrome, inappropriate use of antacids, poor nutrition, vitamin D deficiency, or a genetic defect in vitamin D metabolism. The patient with Fanconi syndrome usually has metabolic acidosis, glycosuria, aminoaciduria, and a low plasma uric acid level. Measurement of 25-D and 1,25-D, calcium, and PTH differentiates among the various vitamin D deficiency disorders and primary renal phosphate wasting (see Chapter 69). Hyperparathy- roidism is easily distinguished by the presence of elevated plasma PTH and calcium values. Treatment The plasma phosphorus level, the presence of symptoms, the like- lihood of chronic depletion, and the presence of ongoing losses dictate the approach to therapy. Mild hypophosphatemia does not require treatment unless the clinical situation suggests that chronic phosphorus depletion is present or that losses are ongoing. Oral phosphorus can cause diarrhea, so the doses should be divided IV therapy is effective in patients who have severe deficiency or who cannot tolerate oral medications. IV phosphorus is available as either sodium phosphate or potassium phosphate, with the choice usually based on the patient's plasma potassium level. Starting doses are 0.08-0.16 mmol/kg over 6 hours. The oral preparations of phos- phorus are available with various ratios of sodium and potassium. This is an important consideration because some patients may not tolerate the potassium load, whereas supplemental potassium may be helpful in some diseases, such as Fanconi syndrome and malnu- trition. Oral maintenance dosages are 2-3 mmol/kg/day in divided doses, although the maintenance dose varies considerably between patients. Increasing dietary phosphorus is the only intervention needed in infants with inadequate intake. Other patients may also benefit from increased dietary phosphorus, usually from dairy products. Phosphorus-binding antacids should be discontinued in patients with hypophosphatemia. Certain diseases require specific ther- apy (see Chapter 69). Specifically, X-linked hypophosphatemia responds to burosumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting FGF-23. Table 73.10 Causes of Hyperphosphatemia TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS Tumor lysis syndrome Rhabdomyolysis Acute hemolysis Diabetic ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis INCREASED INTAKE Enemas and laxatives Cow's milk in infants Treatment of hypophosphatemia Vitamin D intoxication DECREASED EXCRETION Kidney failure Hypoparathyroidism or pseudohypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200/ 603233/103580/241410/203330) Acromegaly Hyperthyroidism Tumoral calcinosis with hyperphosphatemia: genetic (OMIM 211900/617993/617994) or autoimmune OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n -bi.nIm.nih.gov/omim). HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA Etiology and Pathophysiology Renal insufficiency is the most common cause of hyperphosphatemia, with the severity proportional to the degree of kidney impairment (see Chapter 572). This occurs because GI absorption of the large dietary intake of phosphorus is unregulated, and the kidneys normally excrete this phosphorus. As kidney function deteriorates, increased excretion of phosphorus is able to compensate. When kidney function is <30% of normal, hyperphosphatemia usually develops, although this varies considerably depending on dietary intake. Many of the other causes of hyperphosphatemia are more likely to develop in the setting of decreased kidney function (Table 73.10). Cellular content of phosphorus is high relative to plasma phos- phorus, and cell lysis can release substantial phosphorus. This is the etiology of hyperphosphatemia in tumor lysis syndrome, rhabdo- myolysis, and acute hemolysis. These disorders cause concomitant potassium release and the risk of hyperkalemia. Additional features of tumor lysis and rhabdomyolysis are hyperuricemia and hypocalcemia, whereas indirect hyperbilirubinemia and elevated lactate dehydroge- nase (LDH) values are often present with hemolysis. An elevated CPK level is suggestive of rhabdomyolysis. During lactic acidosis or DKA, use of phosphorus by cells decreases, and phosphorus shifts into the ECS. This problem reverses when the underlying problem is corrected, and especially with DKA, patients subsequently become hypophospha- temic because of previous renal phosphorus loss. Excessive intake of phosphorus is especially dangerous in children with decreased kidney function. Neonates are at risk because kidney function is normally reduced during the first few months of life. In addition, they may erroneously be given doses of phosphorus that are meant for an older child or adult. In infants fed cow's milk, which has higher phosphorus content than breast milk or formula, hyperphos- phatemia may develop. Fleet Enema has a high amount of phosphorus that can be absorbed, especially in the patient with an ileus; infants and children with Hirschsprung disease are especially vulnerable. There is often associated hypernatremia from sodium absorption and water loss from diarrhea. Sodium phosphorus laxatives may cause hyperphospha- temia if the dose is excessive or if renal insufficiency is present. Hyper- phosphatemia occurs in children who receive overaggressive treatment for hypophosphatemia. Vitamin D intoxication causes excessive GI absorption of both calcium and phosphorus, and the suppression of PTH by hypercalcemia decreases renal phosphorus excretion. 

The absence of PTH in hypoparathyroidism or PTH responsive- ness in pseudohypoparathyroidism causes hyperphosphatemia because of increased resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule of the kidney (see Chapters 611 and 612). The associated hypocalce- mia is responsible for the clinical symptoms. The hyperphosphatemia in hyperthyroidism or acromegaly is usually mild. It is secondary to increased resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule from the actions of thyroxine or growth hormone. Excessive thyroxine can also cause bone resorption, which may contribute to the hyperphos- phatemia and cause hypercalcemia. Patients with familial tumoral calcinosis (three types), a rare autosomal recessive disorder, have hyperphosphatemia because of decreased renal phosphate excre- tion and heterotopic calcifications. The disease may be secondary to pathologic variants in the genes for a glycosyltransferase (most com- mon etiology), FGF-23, or klotho, which encodes the co-receptor for FGF-23. Autoimmune hyperphosphatemic tumoral calcinosis occurs with antibodies producing FGF-23 resistance. Clinical Manifestations The principal clinical consequences of hyperphosphatemia are hypocalcemia and systemic calcification. The hypocalcemia is probably caused by tissue deposition of calcium-phosphorus salt, inhibition of 1,25-D production, and decreased bone resorption. Symptomatic hypocalcemia is most likely to occur when the phos- phorus level increases rapidly or when diseases predisposing to hypocalcemia are present (chronic kidney disease, rhabdomyolysis). Systemic calcification occurs because the solubility of phosphorus and calcium in the plasma is exceeded. Clinically, this condition is often apparent in the conjunctiva, where it manifests as a foreign body feeling, erythema, and injection. More ominous manifesta- tions are hypoxia from pulmonary calcification and kidney failure from nephrocalcinosis. Plasma creatinine and BUN levels should be assessed in any patient with hyperphosphatemia. The history should focus on intake of phosphorus and the presence of chronic diseases that may cause hyperphosphatemia. Measurement of K*, uric acid, calcium, LDH, bilirubin, hemoglobin, and CPK may be indicated if rhabdomy- olysis, tumor lysis, or hemolysis is suspected. With mild hyper- phosphatemia and significant hypocalcemia, measurement of the serum PTH level distinguishes between hypoparathyroidism and pseudohypoparathyroidism. The treatment of acute hyperphosphatemia depends on its severity and etiology. Mild hyperphosphatemia in a patient with reasonable renal function spontaneously resolves; the resolution can be accel- erated by dietary phosphorus restriction. If kidney function is not impaired, IV fluids can enhance renal phosphorus excretion. For more significant hyperphosphatemia or a situation such as tumor lysis or rhabdomyolysis, in which endogenous phosphorus genera- tion is likely to continue, addition of an oral phosphorus binder pre- vents absorption of dietary phosphorus and can remove phosphorus from the body by binding what is normally secreted and absorbed by the GI tract. Phosphorus binders are most effective when given with food. Binders containing aluminum hydroxide are especially efficient, but calcium carbonate is an effective alternative and may be preferred if there is a need to treat concomitant hypocalcemia. Preservation of renal function, as with high urine flow in rhabdomy- olysis or tumor lysis, is an important adjunct because it will permit continued excretion of phosphorus. If the hyperphosphatemia is not responding to conservative management, especially if acute kidney injury is supervening, dialysis may be necessary to increase phos- phorus removal. Dietary phosphorus restriction is necessary for diseases causing chronic hyperphosphatemia. However, such diets are often difficult Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 509 to follow, given the abundance of phosphorus in a variety of foods. Dietary restriction is often sufficient in conditions such as hypo- parathyroidism and mild chronic kidney disease. For more prob- lematic hyperphosphatemia, such as with moderate chronic kidney disease and end-stage kidney disease, phosphorus binders are usu- ally necessary. They include calcium carbonate, calcium acetate, sevelamer, ferric citrate, sucroferric oxyhydroxide, and lanthanum. Aluminum-containing phosphorus binders are no longer used in patients with chronic kidney disease because of the risk of alumi- num toxicity. Dialysis directly removes phosphorus from the blood in patients with end-stage kidney disease, but it is only an adjunct to dietary restriction and phosphorus binders; removal by dialysis does not keep up with normal dietary intake. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 73.7 Acid-Base Balance Larry A. Greenbaum ACID-BASE PHYSIOLOGY Terminology Chronic, mild derangements in acid-base status may interfere with normal growth and development, whereas acute, severe changes in pH can be fatal. Control of acid-base balance depends on the kidneys, the lungs, and intracellular and extracellular buffers. A normal pH is 7.35-7.45. There is an inverse relationship between the pH and the hydrogen ion concentration([H*]). Ata pH of 7.40, [H*] is 40 nmol/L. A normal serum sodium concentration, 140 mEq/L, is 1 million times higher. Maintaining a normal pH is necessary because hydrogen ions are highly reactive and are especially likely to combine with proteins, altering their function. An acid is a substance that releases ("donates") a hydrogen ion (H*). A base is a substance that accepts a hydrogen ion. An acid (HA) can dissociate into a hydrogen ion and a conjugate base (A*), as follows: HA-H+ +A- A strong acid is highly dissociated, so in this reaction, there is lit- tle HA. A weak acid is poorly dissociated; not all the hydrogen ions are released from HA. A acts as a base when the reaction moves to the left. These reactions are in equilibrium. When HA is added to the system, there is dissociation of some HA until the concen- trations of Ht and A increase enough that a new equilibrium is reached. Addition of hydrogen ions causes a decrease in A and an increase in HA. Addition of A causes a decrease in hydrogen ions and an increase in HA. Buffers are substances that attenuate the change in pH that occurs when acids or bases are added to the body. Given the extremely low [H*] in the body at physiologic pH, without buffers a small amount of hydrogen ions could cause a dramatic decline in the pH. Buffers prevent the decrease in pH by binding the added hydrogen ions, as follows: A +H+ → HA The increase in [H*] drives this reaction to the right. Similarly, when base is added to the body, buffers prevent the pH from increasing by releasing hydrogen ions, as follows: HA → A +H+ The best buffers are weak acids and bases. This is because a buffer works best when it is 50% dissociated (half HA and half A-). The pH at which a buffer is 50% dissociated is its pK, (ionization constant 

510 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders of acid). The best physiologic buffers have a pK, close to 7.40. The concentration of a buffer and its pK, determine the buffer's effec- tiveness (buffering capacity). When the pH is lower than the pKa of a buffer, there is more HA than A-. When the pH is higher than the pKa, there is more A than HA. Physiologic Buffers The bicarbonate and nonbicarbonate buffers protect the body against major changes in pH. The bicarbonate buffer system is routinely monitored clinically and is based on the relationship between carbon dioxide (CO2) and bicarbonate (HCO3 ): CO, + H20 →H† + HCO3 - CO, acts as an acid in that, after combining with water, it releases an Ht; bicarbonate acts as its conjugate base in that it accepts an Ht. The pKa of this reaction is 6.1. The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation expresses the relationship among pH, pK,, and the concentrations of an acid and its conjugate base. This relationship is valid for any buf- fer. The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation for bicarbonate and CO, is pH =6.1 + log [HCO3 - ] / [CO2] The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation for the bicarbonate buf- fer system has three variables: pH, bicarbonate concentration ([HCO3 ]), and carbon dioxide concentration ([COz]). Thus, if any two of these variables are known, it is possible to calculate the is important that CO, and bicarbonate have the same units. CO, is reported clinically as mm Hg and must be multiplied by its solubil- ity constant, 0.03 mmol/L/mm Hg, before the equation can be used Mathematical manipulation of the Henderson-Hasselbalch equa- tion produces the following relationship: [H+ ]=24×PCO,\HCO;] At a normal [H*] of 40 nmol (pH 7.40), the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pcoz), which is expressed as mm Hg in this equa- pice be tele by the at of to a [HCO3). The bicarbonate buffer system is very effective because of the high concentration of bicarbonate in the body (24 mEq/L) and because it is an open system. The remaining body buffers are in a closed system. The bicarbonate buffer system is an open system because the lungs increase CO, excretion when the blood CO, con- centration increases. When acid is added to the body, the following reaction occurs: H+ + HCO3 - → CO2 + H20 In a closed system, the CO, would increase. The higher CO, concen- tration would lead to an increase in the reverse reaction: This would increase [H*], limiting the buffering capacity of bicarbonate. However, because the lungs excrete the excess CO,, the reverse reaction does not increase; this fact enhances the buffering capacity of bicarbonate. The same principle holds with the addition of base, because the lungs decrease CO, excretion and prevent the CO, level from falling. The lack of change in [CO,] dramatically increases the buffering capacity of bicarbonate. The nonbicarbonate buffers include proteins, phosphate, and bone. Protein buffers consist of extracellular proteins, mostly albumin and intracellular proteins, including hemoglobin. Proteins are effec- tive buffers, largely because of the presence of the amino acid histi- dine, which has a side chain that can bind or release Ht. The pK, of histidine varies slightly, depending on its position in the protein mol- ecule, but its average pK, is approximately 6.5. This is close enough to a normal pH (7.4) to make histidine an effective buffer. Hemoglobin and albumin have 34 and 16 histidine molecules, respectively. Phosphate can bind up to three hydrogen molecules, so it can exist as P04, HPO*-, H2P04-, or HPO,. However, at a physiologic pH, most phosphate exists as either HPO,= or H PO, HPO,= is an acid, and HPO, - is its conjugate base: HPO, - →H+ + HPO, - The pK, of this reaction is 6.8, making phosphate an effective buffer. The concentration of phosphate in the ECS is relatively low, limiting the overall buffering capacity of phosphate; it is less important than albumin. However, phosphate is found at a much higher concentration in the urine, where it is an important buffer. In the ICS, most phosphate is covalently bound to organic molecules (ATP), but it still serves as an Bone is an important buffer. Bone is basic—it is composed of com- pounds such as sodium bicarbonate and calcium carbonate—and thus dissolution of bone releases base. This release can buffer an acid load, although at the expense of bone density, if it occurs over an extended period. In contrast, bone formation, by consuming base, helps buffer excess base. Clinically, we measure the extracellular pH, but it is the intracellu- lar pH that affects cell function. Measurement of the intracellular pH is unnecessary because changes in the intracellular pH parallel the changes in the extracellular pH. However, the change in the intracellu- lar pH tends to be less than the change in the extracellular pH because of the greater buffering capacity in the ICS. NORMAL ACID-BASE BALANCE The lungs and kidneys maintain a normal acid-base balance. Car- bon dioxide generated during normal metabolism is a weak acid. The lungs prevent an increase in the Pco, in the blood by excret- ing the CO, that the body produces. CO2 production varies accord- ing to the body's metabolic needs, increasing with physical activity. The rapid pulmonary response to changes in the CO, concentration occurs via central sensing of the Pcoz and a subsequent increase or decrease in ventilation to maintain a normal Pco2 (35-45 mm Hg). An increase in ventilation decreases the Pcoz, and a decrease in ventilation increases the Pco2. The kidneys excrete endogenous acid. An adult normally pro- duces approximately 1-2 mEq/kg/24 hr of Ht. Children normally produce 2-3 mEq/kg/24 hr of H*. The three principal sources of H* are dietary protein metabolism, incomplete metabolism of carbohy- drates and fat, and stool losses of bicarbonate. Because metabolism of protein generates Ht, endogenous acid production varies with protein intake. The complete oxidation of carbohydrates or fats to CO, and water does not generate Ht; the lungs remove the CO2. However, incomplete metabolism of carbohydrates or fats produces Ht. Incomplete glucose metabolism can produce lactic acid, and incomplete triglyceride metabolism can produce ketoacids, such as ß-hydroxybutyric acid and acetoacetic acid. There is always some baseline incomplete metabolism that contributes to endogenous production. This factor increases in pathologic conditions, such as lactic acidosis and diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). Stool loss of bicarbonate is the third major source of endogenous acid produc- tion. The stomach secretes Ht, but most of the remainder of the GI tract secretes bicarbonate, and the net effect is a loss of bicarbonate from the body. To secrete bicarbonate, the cells of the intestine pro- duce hydrogen ions that are released into the bloodstream. For each bicarbonate molecule lost in the stool, the body gains one Ht. This source of endogenous acid production is normally minimal but may increase dramatically in a patient with diarrhea. 

The hydrogen ions formed from endogenous acid production are neutralized by bicarbonate, potentially causing the bicarbonate con- centration to decrease. The kidneys regenerate this bicarbonate by secreting Ht. The lungs cannot regenerate bicarbonate, even though loss of CO, lowers the [H*], as shown in the following reaction: H+ + HCO3 - → CO2 + H20 Proximal tubule NH4+ Collecting - H+ Loop of Henle Fig. 73.7 Tubular sites involved in acid-base balance. The proximal tubule is the site where most filtered bicarbonate is reclaimed, even though other sites along the nephron, especially the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle, resorb some of the filtered bicarbonate. The collecting duct is the principal location for the hydrogen ion secretion that acidifies the urine. The proximal tubule generates the ammonia that serves as a urinary buffer in the collecting duct. Tubular lumen Proximal tubule Na+ Peritubular fluid Filtered + H+. НСОз Н2СО3 3 H20 + CO2 2 5 H20 > Na+ > ЗНСО3- > 2Na+ Fig. 73.8 Resorption of filtered bicarbonate in the proximal tubule. The Na+,K+-ATPase (1) excretes sodium across the basolateral cell membrane, maintaining a low intracellular sodium concentration. The low intracellular sodium concentration provides the energy for the Nat,H+ antiporter (2), which exchanges sodium from the tubular lumen for intracellular hydrogen ions. The hydrogen ions that are se- creted into the tubular lumen then combine with filtered bicarbonate to generate carbonic acid. CO2 and water are produced from carbonic acid (H,CO3). This reaction is catalyzed by luminal carbonic anhydrase (3). CO, diffuses into the cell and combines with OH- ions to gener- ate bicarbonate. This reaction is catalyzed by an intracellular carbonic anhydrase (4). The dissociation of water generates an OH- ion and an H+ ion. The Nat,H+ antiporter (2) secretes the hydrogen ions. Bicar- bonate ions cross the basolateral membrane and enter the blood via the 3HCO3-/1 Nat co-transporter (5). The energy for the 3HCO3-/1Na+ co-transporter comes from the negatively charged cell interior, which makes it electrically favorable to transport a net negative charge (i.e., 3 bicarbonates and only 1 sodium) out of the cell. Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 511 A decrease in [CO2] causes the reaction to move to the right, which decreases [H*], but it also lowers [HCO,*]. During a metabolic acidosis, hyperventilation can lower [CO2], decrease [H*], and thus increase pH. The underlying metabolic acidosis is still present. Similarly, the kidneys cannot correct an abnormally high [COz], as shown in the following reaction: H+ + HCO3 → CO2 + H20 An increase in [HCO,] also causes the reaction to move to the right, which increases [CO2] while simultaneously decreasing [H*]. During a respiratory acidosis, increased renal generation of bicarbon- ate can decrease H* and increase pH but cannot repair the respiratory acidosis. Both the lungs and the kidneys can affect [H*] and thus pH However, only the lungs can regulate [CO2], and only the kidneys can regulate [HCO3 ]. Renal Mechanisms The kidneys regulate the serum bicarbonate concentration by modify- ing acid excretion in the urine. This requires a two-step process. First, the renal tubules resorb the bicarbonate that is filtered at the glomeru- lus. Second, there is tubular secretion of Ht. The urinary excretion of Ht generates bicarbonate that neutralizes endogenous acid production. The tubular actions necessary for renal acid excretion occur through- out the nephron (Fig. 73.7). The resorption of filtered bicarbonate is a necessary first step in renal regulation of the acid-base balance. A normal adult has a GFR of approximately 180 L/24 hr. This fluid enters Bowman's space with [HCO,*] that is essentially identical to the plasma concentration, nor- mally 24 mEq/L. Multiplying 180 L by 24 mEq/L indicates that >4,000 mEg of bicarbonate enters Bowmans space each day. This bicarbon- ate, if not reclaimed along the nephron, would be lost in the urine and would cause a profound metabolic acidosis. The proximal tubule reclaims approximately 85% of the fil- tered bicarbonate (Fig. 73.8). The final 15% is reclaimed beyond the proximal tubule, mostly in the ascending limb of the loop of Henle. Bicarbonate molecules are not transported from the tubular fluid into the cells of the proximal tubule. Rather, hydrogen ions are secreted into the tubular fluid, leading to conversion of filtered bicarbonate into CO, and water. The secretion of H+ by the cells of the proximal tubule is coupled to generation of intracellular bicarbonate, which is transported across the basolateral membrane of the proximal tubule cell and enters the capillaries. The bicar- bonate produced in the cell replaces the bicarbonate filtered at the Increased bicarbonate resorption by the cells of the proximal tubule- -the result of increased Ht secretion-occurs in a variety of clinical situations. Volume depletion increases bicarbonate resorption. This is partially mediated by activation of the renin-angiotensin sys- tem; angiotensin II increases bicarbonate resorption. Increased bicar- bonate resorption in the proximal tubule is one of the mechanisms that accounts for the metabolic alkalosis that may occur in some patients with volume depletion. Other stimuli that increase bicarbonate resorption include hypokalemia and an increased Pco2. This partially explains the observations that hypokalemia causes a metabolic alkalo- sis, and that a respiratory acidosis leads to a compensatory increase in serum [HCO3 ]. Stimuli that decrease bicarbonate resorption in the proximal tubule may cause a decrease in the serum [HCO,*]. A decrease in the Pcoz (respiratory alkalosis) decreases proximal tubule bicarbonate resorp- tion, partially mediating the decrease in serum [HCO3] that com- pensates for a respiratory alkalosis. PTH decreases proximal tubule bicarbonate resorption; hyperparathyroidism may cause a mild meta- bolic acidosis. A variety of medications and diseases cause a metabolic acidosis by impairing bicarbonate resorption in the proximal tubule. Examples are the medication acetazolamide, which directly inhibits carbonic anhydrase, and the many disorders that cause proximal RTA 

512 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders After reclaiming filtered bicarbonate, the kidneys perform the sec- ond step in renal acid-base handling, the excretion of the acid created by endogenous acid production. Excretion of acid occurs mostly in the collecting duct, with a small role for the distal tubule. Along with secretion of H* by the tubular cells lining the collect- ing duct, adequate excretion of endogenous acid requires the pres- ence of urinary buffers. The hydrogen pumps in the collecting duct cannot lower the urine pH below 4.5. The [Ht] at pH 4.5 is <0.04 mEq/L; it would require >25 L of water with a pH of 4.5 to excrete one mEq of H*. A 10-kg child, with an endogenous acid production of 20 mEq H+ each day, would need to have a daily urinary output of >500 L without the presence of urinary buffers. As in the blood, buf- fers in the urine attenuate the decrease in pH that occurs with the addition of H+. The two principal urinary buffers are phosphate and Urinary phosphate is proportional to dietary intake. Whereas most of the phosphate filtered at the glomerulus is resorbed in the proximal tubule, the urinary phosphate concentration is usually much greater than the serum phosphate concentration. This arrange- ment allows phosphate to serve as an effective buffer through the fol- lowing reaction: The pK, of this reaction is 6.8, making phosphate an effective buffer as the urinary pH decreases from 7.0 to 5.0 within the collecting duct. Although phosphate is an effective buffer, its buffering capacity is lim- ited by its concentration; there is no mechanism for increasing urinary phosphate excretion in response to changes in acid-base status. In contrast, ammonia production can be modified, allowing for regulation of acid excretion. The buffering capacity of ammonia (NH3) is based on the reaction of ammonia with hydrogen ions to form ammonium: NH +H* → NH+ The cells of the proximal tubule are the source of the excreted ammonia, mostly through metabolism of glutamine through the fol- lowing reactions: Glutamine → NH, + + glutamate Tubular lumen Collecting duct › Na+ CI- < Peritubular fluid 3 H+| » НСО3* H+ HPO₽- + H+ H2PO4 H20 он- + СОг - НСО3- NH4* - H+ + NH3 * NH3 NH4* Fig. 73.9 Secretion of hydrogen ions in the collecting duct. The disso- ciation of water generates an OH- ion and an H+ ion. The H+-ATPase (1) secretes hydrogen ions into the tubular lumen. Bicarbonate is formed when an OH- ion combines with CO, in a reaction mediated by carbon- ic anhydrase (2). Bicarbonate ions cross the basolateral membrane and enter the blood via the HCO-/Cl exchanger (3). The hydrogen ions in the tubular lumen are buffered by phosphate and ammonia (NH,) NH can diffuse from the peritubular fluid into the tubular lumen, but ammonium (NH4*) cannot pass through the cells of the collecting duct. Glutamate → NH4 + + a - ketoglutarate'- The metabolism of glutamine generates two ammonium ions. In addition, the metabolism of a-ketoglutarate generates two bicarbon- ate molecules. The ammonium ions are secreted into the lumen of the proximal tubule, whereas the bicarbonate molecules exit the proximal tubule cells via the basolateral Na+,3HCO, co-transporter (see Fig. 73.8). This arrangement would seem to accomplish the goal of excret- ing H+ (as NH4*) and regenerating bicarbonate molecules. However, the ammonium ions secreted in the proximal tubule do not remain within the tubular lumen. Cells of the TAL of the loop of Henle resorb the ammonium ions. The result is that there is a high medullary inter- stitial concentration of ammonia, but the tubular fluid entering the collecting duct does not have significant amounts of ammonium ions. Moreover, the hydrogen ions that were secreted with ammonia (as ammonium ions) in the proximal tubule enter the bloodstream, can- celing the effect of the bicarbonate generated in the proximal tubule. The excretion of ammonium ions, and thus of hydrogen ions, depends on the cells of the collecting duct. The cells of the collecting duct secrete H+ and regenerate bicarbon- ate, which is returned to the bloodstream (Fig. 73.9). This bicarbonate neutralizes endogenous acid production. Phosphate and ammonia buffer the Ht secreted by the collecting duct. Ammonia is an effec- tive buffer because of the high concentrations in the medullary inter- stitium and because the cells of the collecting duct are permeable to ammonia but not to ammonium. As ammonia diffuses into the lumen of the collecting duct, the low urine pH causes almost all the ammonia to be converted into ammonium. This process maintains a low luminal ammonia concentration. Because the luminal pH is lower than the pH in the medullary interstitium, there is a higher concentration of ammonia within the medullary interstitium than in the tubular lumen, favoring movement of ammonia into the tubular lumen. Even though the concentration of ammonium in the tubular lumen is higher than in the interstitium, the cells of the collecting duct are impermeable to ammonium, preventing back-diffusion of ammonium out of the tubular lumen and permitting ammonia to be an effective buffer. The kidneys adjust H+ excretion according to physiologic needs. There is variation in endogenous acid production, largely a result of diet and pathophysiologic stresses, such as diarrheal losses of bicar- bonate, which increase the need for acid excretion. Ht excretion is increased by upregulation of H+ secretion in the collecting duct, caus- ing the pH of the urine to decrease. This response is prompt, occurring within hours of an acid load, but it is limited by the buffering capacity of the urine; the hydrogen pumps in the collecting duct cannot lower the pH to <4.5. A more significant increase in acid excretion requires upregulation of ammonia production by the proximal tubule so that more ammonia is available to serve as a buffer in the tubular lumen of the collecting duct. This response to a low serum pH reaches its maxi- mum within 5-6 days; ammonia excretion can increase approximately 10-fold over the baseline value. Acid excretion by the collecting duct increases in a number of differ- ent clinical situations. The extracellular pH is the most important regu- lator of renal acid excretion. A decrease in the extracellular pH from either a respiratory or a metabolic acidosis causes an increase in renal acid excretion. Aldosterone stimulates H+ excretion in the collecting duct, causing an increase in the serum bicarbonate concentration. This explains the metabolic alkalosis that occurs with primary hyper- aldosteronism or secondary hyperaldosteronism caused by volume depletion. Hypokalemia increases acid secretion, by both stimulating ammonia production in the proximal tubule and increasing Ht secre- tion in the collecting duct. Hypokalemia therefore tends to produce a metabolic alkalosis. Hyperkalemia has the opposite effects, which may cause a metabolic acidosis. In patients with an increased pH, the kidney has two principal mech- anisms for correcting the problem. First, less bicarbonate is resorbed in the proximal tubule, leading to an increase in urinary bicarbonate losses. Second, in a limited number of specialized cells, the process for 

secretion of Ht by the collecting duct can be reversed (see Fig. 73.9), leading to secretion of bicarbonate into the tubular lumen and secre- tion of hydrogen ions into the peritubular fluid, where they enter the bloodstream. CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF ACID-BASE DISORDERS The following rearrangement of the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation emphasizes the relationship among Pcoz, bicarbonate concentration, and hydrogen ion concentration: [H*] =24× PCO2 [HCO;] An increase in the Pcoz or a decrease in [HCO3 ] increases [H*]; the pH decreases. A decrease in the Pcoz or an increase in [HCO,] decreases [H*]; the pH increases. Terminology Acidemia is a pH below normal (<7.35), and alkalemia is a pH above normal (>7.45). An acidosis is a pathologic process that causes an increase in (H*], and an alkalosis is a pathologic process that causes a decrease in [H*]. Whereas acidemia is always accompanied by an aci- dosis, a patient can have an acidosis and a low, normal, or high pH. For example, a patient may have a mild metabolic acidosis but a simul- taneous, severe respiratory alkalosis; the net result may be alkalemia. Acidemia and alkalemia indicate the pH abnormality; acidosis and alkalosis indicate the pathologic process that is taking place. A simple acid-base disorder is a single primary disturbance. During a simple metabolic disorder, there is respiratory compensa- tion. With a metabolic acidosis, the decrease in the pH increases the ventilatory drive, causing a decrease in PcOz. The decrease in the [CO,] leads to an increase in the pH. This appropriate respira- tory compensation is expected with a primary metabolic acidosis. Despite the decrease in [COzl, appropriate respiratory compen- sation is not a respiratory alkalosis, even though it is sometimes erroneously called a "compensatory" respiratory alkalosis. A low Pcoz can result either from a primary respiratory alkalosis or from appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis. Appropriate respiratory compensation also occurs with a primary Table 73.11 DISORDER Metabolic acidosis Metabolic alkalosis Respiratory Acidosis Acute Chronic Respiratory Alkalosis Acute Chronic Appropriate Compensation During Simple Acid-Base Disorders EXPECTED COMPENSATION Pc02 = 1.5 × [НСО3 ] + 8 $ 2 Pcoz increases by 7 mm Hg for each 10 mEq/L increase in serum (HCO3 ] [HCO3 ] increases by 1 for each 10mm Hg increase in Pcoz [HCO3 ] increases by 3.5 for each 10mm Hg increase in Pcoz [HCO3 ] falls by 2 for each 10mm Hg decrease in Pcoz [HCO3 ] falls by 4 for each 10mm Hg decrease in Pcoz Table 73.12 pH [HCO3] Pcoz Normal Values of Arterial Blood Gases 7.35-7.45 20-28 mEq/L 35-45 mm Hg Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 513 metabolic alkalosis, although in this case [CO,] increases to attenu- ate the increase in the pH. The respiratory compensation for a met- abolic process happens quickly and is complete within 12-24 hours; it cannot overcompensate for or normalize the pH. During a primary respiratory process, there is metabolic compensa- tion, mediated by the kidneys. The kidneys respond to a respiratory acidosis by increasing Ht excretion, thereby increasing bicarbonate generation and raising the serum [HCO3 ]. The kidneys increase bicar- bonate excretion to compensate for a respiratory alkalosis; |HCO?"| decreases. Unlike respiratory compensation, which occurs rapidly, it takes 3-4 days for the kidneys to complete appropriate metabolic com- pensation. There is, however, a small and rapid compensatory change in [HCO3 ] during a primary respiratory process. The expected appro- priate metabolic compensation for a respiratory disorder depends on whether the process is acute or chronic. A mixed acid-base disorder is present when there is more than one primary acid-base disturbance. An infant with bronchopulmo- nary dysplasia may have a respiratory acidosis from chronic lung dis- ease and a metabolic alkalosis from the furosemide used to treat the chronic lung disease. More dramatically, a child with pneumonia and sepsis may have severe acidemia because of a combined metabolic acidosis caused by lactic acid and respiratory acidosis caused by ven- tilatory failure. There are formulas for calculating the appropriate metabolic or respiratory compensation for the six primary simple acid-base dis- orders (Table 73.11). The appropriate compensation is expected in a simple disorder; it is not optional. If a patient does not have the appropriate compensation, a mixed acid-base disorder is present. For example, if a patient has a primary metabolic acidosis with a serum [HCO3 ] of 10 mEq/L, the expected respiratory compensa- tion is [CO2] of 23 mm Hg ‡ 2 (1.5 x 10 + 8 ‡ 2 = 23 ÷ 2; see Table 73.11). If the patient's [CO2] is >25 mm Hg, a concurrent respira- tory acidosis is present; [CO2] is higher than expected. A patient may have a respiratory acidosis despite a CO, level below the "nor- mal" value of 35-45 mm Hg. In this example, [COz] <21 mm Hg indicates a concurrent respiratory alkalosis; [CO2] is lower than exp ected. Diagnosis A systematic evaluation of an arterial blood gas (ABG) sample, com- bined with the clinical history, can usually explain the patient's acid- base disturbance. Assessment of an ABG sample requires knowledge of normal values (Table 73.12). In most cases, this is accomplished through a three-step process (Fig. 73.10): 1. Determine whether acidemia or alkalemia is present. 2. Determine a cause of the acidemia or alkalemia. 3. Determine whether a mixed disorder is present. Most patients with an acid-base disturbance have an abnormal pH, although there are two exceptions. One exception is in the patient with a mixed disorder in which the two processes have opposite effects on pH (a metabolic acidosis and a respiratory alka- losis) and cause changes in [H*] that are comparable in magnitude, although opposite. The other exception is in the patient with a simple chronic respiratory alkalosis; in some cases, the appropriate metabolic compensation is enough to normalize the pH. In both situations, the presence of an acid-base disturbance is deduced because of the abnormal CO2 and bicarbonate levels. Determining the acid-base disturbance in these patients requires proceeding to the third step of the process. The second step requires inspection of the serum [HCO3 ] and Pcoz to determine a cause of the abnormal pH (see Fig. 73.10). In most cases, there is only one obvious explanation for the abnormal pH. In some mixed disorders, however, there may be two possibilities (e.g., a high Pcoz and a low [HCO3 ] in a patient with acidemia). In such cases, the patient has two causes for abnormal pH—a metabolic acido- sis and a respiratory acidosis, in this instance-and it is unnecessary to proceed to the third step. The third step requires determining whether the patient's com- pensation is appropriate. It is assumed that the primary disorder was 

514 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Acidemia or Alkalemia - Step Acidemia Alkalemia Step 2- Decreased Increased [HCO3 *] РСО2 Increased [HCO3 ] Decreased PCO, Metabolic acidosis Respiratory acidosis Metabolic alkalosis Respiratory alkalosis Step 3 Low Expected PCOz Mixed Simple Met. Met. Acid. Acid. and Resp. Alk. High LoW Expected High Mixed Mixed Met. Resp. Resp. Acid. Acid. and and Acid. Resp. Met. Acid. Acid. Mixed Resp. Acid. and Met. Alk. Low РСОг. Mixed Met. Alk. and Resp. Alk. Expected PCO2 Simple Met. Alk. Expected High Acid. Acid. Resp. Alk. and Met. Alk. Fig. 73.10 Three-step process for interpreting acid-base disturbances. In step 1, determine whether the pH is low (acidemia) or high (alkalemia). diagnosed in the second step, and the expected compensation is cal- culated (see Table 73.11). If the compensation is appropriate, a simple acid-base disorder is present. If the compensation is not appropriate, a mixed disorder is present. The identity of the second disorder is deter- mined by deciding whether the compensation is too little or too much compared with what was expected (see Fig. 73.10). The history is always useful in evaluating and diagnosing patients with acid-base disturbances. It is especially helpful in a respiratory pro- cess. The expected metabolic compensation for a respiratory process changes according to whether the process is acute or chronic, which can be deduced only from the history. The metabolic compensation for an acute respiratory acidosis is less than that for a chronic respiratory acidosis. In a patient with a respiratory acidosis, a small increase in [HCO3 ] would be consistent with a simple acute respiratory acidosis or a mixed disorder (a chronic respiratory acidosis and a metabolic acidosis). Only the history can differentiate among the possibilities. Knowledge of the length of the respiratory process and the presence or absence of a risk factor for a metabolic acidosis (diarrhea) allows the correct conclusion to be reached. An alternative to the physiologic approach just described (which includes calculation of the anion gap; see later) is the physiochemical approach, often called the Stewart method. Some view this approach as superior to the physiologic approach, but it requires multiple calcu- lations and additional laboratory values and is thus more challenging to use in the clinical setting. The physiochemical approach requires measurement of the blood pH and Pcoz and calculation of the appar- ent strong ion difference (SIDa), the effective strong ion difference (SIDe), the strong ion gap (SIG), and the total concentration of weak METABOLIC ACIDOSIS Metabolic acidosis occurs frequently in hospitalized children; diarrhea is the most common etiology. For a patient with an unknown medical problem, the presence of a metabolic acidosis is often helpful diagnos- tically, because it suggests a relatively narrow differential diagnosis. Patients with a metabolic acidosis have a low serum [HCO3 ], although not every patient with a low serum [HCO3 ] has a metabolic acidosis. The exception is the patient with a respiratory alkalosis, which causes a decrease in the serum [HCO3 ] as part of appropriate renal compensation. In a patient with an isolated metabolic acidosis, there is a predictable decrease in the blood [COz), as follows: PC02 = 1.5 × [HCO3] + 8 ÷2 A mixed acid-base disturbance is present if the respiratory com- pensation is not appropriate. If the Pcoz is greater than predicted, the patient has a concurrent respiratory acidosis. A lower Pco, than predicted indicates a concurrent respiratory alkalosis or, less fre- quently, an isolated respiratory alkalosis. Because the appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis never normalizes the patient's pH, the presence of a normal pH and a low [HCO,] occurs only if some degree of respiratory alkalosis is present. In this situation, distinguishing an isolated chronic respiratory alkalosis from a mixed metabolic acidosis and acute respiratory alkalosis may be possible only clinically. In contrast, the combination of a low serum pH and a low [HCO3] occurs only if a metabolic aci- dosis is present. Etiology and Pathophysiology There are many causes of a metabolic acidosis (Table 73.13), resulting from three basic mechanisms: 1. Loss of bicarbonate from the body 2. Impaired ability to excrete acid by the kidney 3. Addition of acid to the body (exogenous or endogenous) Diarrhea, the most common cause of metabolic acidosis in chil- dren, causes a loss of bicarbonate from the body. The amount of bicarbonate lost in the stool depends on the volume of diarrhea and [HCO3 ] of the stool, which tends to increase with more severe diarrhea. The kidneys attempt to balance the losses by increasing acid secretion, but metabolic acidosis occurs when this compensa- tion is inadequate. Diarrhea often causes volume depletion because of losses of sodium and water, potentially exacerbating the acidosis by causing shock and a lactic acidosis. In addition, diarrheal losses of potassium lead to hypokalemia. Moreover, the volume depletion causes increased production of aldosterone. This increase stimu- lates renal retention of sodium, helping to maintain intravascular volume, but also leads to increased urinary losses of potassium, exacerbating the hypokalemia. There are four forms of renal tubular acidosis (RTA): distal (type I), proximal (type Il), mixed (type III), and hyperkalemic (type IV) (see Chapter 569). In distal RTA, children may have accompanying hypo- kalemia, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, and nephrocalcinosis. Failure 

Table 73.13 Causes of Metabolic Acidosis NORMAL ANION GAP Diarrhea RTA Distal (type I) RTA (OMIM 179800/602722/267300/611590)* Proximal (type II) RTA (OMIM 604278) † Mixed (type III) RTA (OMIM 259730) Hyperkalemic (type IV) RTA (OMIM 201910/264350/177735/145260)$ Urinary tract diversions Posthypocapnia Ammonium chloride intake INCREASED ANION GAP Lactic Acidosis Tissue hypoxia Shock Hypoxemia Severe anemia Liver failure Malignancy Intestinal bacterial overgrowth Inborn errors of metabolism Medications Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors Metformin Propotol Linezolid Ketoacidosis Diabetic ketoacidosis Starvation ketoacidosis Alcoholic ketoacidosis Kidney Failure Poisoning Ethylene glycol Methanoll Salicylate Toluene Paraldehyde *Along with these genetic disorders, distal RTA may be secondary to renal disease or medications. Most cases of proximal RTA are not caused by this primary genetic disorder. Proximal RTA is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which has multiple etiologies. *Hyperkalemic RTA can be secondary to a genetic disorder (some of the more common are listed) or other etiologies. OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.nc bi.nlm.nih.gov/omim); RTA, renal tubular acidosis. to thrive because of chronic metabolic acidosis is the most common presenting complaint. Patients with distal RTA cannot acidify their urine and thus have a urine pH >5.5 despite a metabolic acidosis. Proximal RTA is rarely present in isolation. In most patients, proximal RTA is part of Fanconi syndrome, a generalized dysfunc- tion of the proximal tubule. The dysfunction leads to glycosuria, aminoaciduria, and excessive urinary losses of phosphate and uric acid. The presence of a low serum uric acid level, glycosuria, and aminoaciduria is helpful diagnostically. Chronic hypophosphatemia leads to rickets in children (see Chapter 69). Rickets and/or failure to thrive may be the presenting complaint. The ability to acidify the urine is intact in proximal RTA; thus untreated patients have a urine pH <5.5. However, bicarbonate therapy increases bicarbon- ate losses in the urine, and the urine pH increases. A mixed RTA (combined distal and proximal) occurs in patients with autosomal recessive osteopetrosis caused by pathologic variants in the gene for carbonic anhydrase II. Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 515 In hyperkalemic RTA, renal excretion of acid and potassium is impaired. Hyperkalemic RTA is the result of hyperkalemia, absence of aldosterone, or inability of the kidney to respond to aldosterone. In severe aldosterone deficiency, as occurs with congenital adrenal hyperplasia because of 21a-hydroxylase deficiency, the hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis are accompanied by hyponatremia and volume depletion from renal salt wasting. Incomplete aldosterone deficiency causes less severe electrolyte disturbances; children may have isolated hyperkalemic RTA, hyperkalemia without acidosis, or isolated hypona- tremia. Patients may have aldosterone deficiency caused by decreased renin production by the kidney; renin normally stimulates aldosterone synthesis. Children with hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism usually have either isolated hyperkalemia or hyperkalemic RTA. The manifes- tations of aldosterone resistance depend on the severity of the resis- tance. In the autosomal recessive form of pseudohypoaldosteronism type I, which is the result of an absence of the sodium channel that normally responds to aldosterone, there is often severe salt wasting and hyponatremia. In contrast, the aldosterone resistance in kidney transplant recipients usually produces either isolated hyperkalemia or hyperkalemic RTA; hyponatremia is unusual. Similarly, the medica- tions that cause hyperkalemic RTA do not cause hyponatremia. Pseu- dohypoaldosteronism type Il, an autosomal dominant disorder also known as Gordon syndrome, is a unique cause of hyperkalemic RTA because the genetic defect causes volume expansion and hypertension. Children with abnormal urinary tracts, usually secondary to con- genital malformations, may require diversion of urine through intes- tinal segments. Ureterosigmoidostomy, anastomosis of a ureter to the sigmoid colon, almost always produces a metabolic acidosis and hypo- kalemia. Consequently, ileal conduits are the more commonly used procedure, although there is still a risk of a metabolic acidosis. The appropriate metabolic compensation for a chronic respira- tory alkalosis is a decrease in renal acid excretion. The resultant decrease in the serum [HCO3 ] lessens the alkalemia caused by the respiratory alkalosis. If the respiratory alkalosis resolves quickly, the patient continues to have a decreased serum [HCO3 ], causing acidemia as the result of a metabolic acidosis. This resolves over 1-2 Lactic acidosis (L-lactic) typically occurs when inadequate oxy- gen delivery to the tissues leads to anaerobic metabolism and excess production of lactic acid. Lactic acidosis may be secondary to shock, severe anemia, or hypoxemia. When the underlying cause of the lactic acidosis is alleviated, the liver is able to metabolize the accu- mulated lactate into bicarbonate, correcting the metabolic acidosis. There is normally some tissue production of lactate metabolized by the liver. In children with severe liver dysfunction, impair- ment of lactate metabolism may produce a lactic acidosis. Rarely, a metabolically active malignancy grows so fast that its blood sup- ply becomes inadequate, with resultant anaerobic metabolism and lactic acidosis. Patients who have short bowel syndrome resulting from small bowel resection can have bacterial overgrowth. In these patients, excessive intestinal bacterial metabolism of glucose into D-lactic acid can cause a lactic acidosis. Lactic acidosis occurs in a variety of inborn errors of metabolism, especially those affect- ing mitochondrial oxidation (see Chapters 107.4 and 108). Medica- tions also can cause lactic acidosis. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors that are used to treat HIV infection inhibit mitochondrial replication; lactic acidosis is a rare complication, although elevated serum lactate concentrations without acidosis are quite common. Metformin, used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus, is most likely to cause a lactic acidosis in patients with chronic kidney disease. High dosages and prolonged use of propofol can cause lactic acidosis. Propylene glycol is a diluent in a variety of oral and IV medications; excessive intake causes a lactic acidosis, principally from accumula- tion of d-lactic acid. Linezolid is another medication that may cause a lactic acidosis 

516 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders In insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, inadequate insulin leads to hyperglycemia and DKA (see Chapter 629). Production of acetoacetic acid and ß-hydroxybutyric acid causes the metabolic acidosis. Admin- istration of insulin corrects the underlying metabolic problem and permits conversion of acetoacetate and ß-hydroxybutyrate into bicar- bonate, which helps correct the metabolic acidosis. However, in some patients, urinary losses of acetoacetate and -hydroxybutyrate may be substantial, preventing rapid regeneration of bicarbonate. In these patients, full correction of the metabolic acidosis requires renal regen- eration of bicarbonate, a slower process. The hyperglycemia causes an osmotic diuresis, usually producing volume depletion, along with sub- stantial losses of potassium, sodium, and phosphate. In starvation ketoacidosis the lack of glucose leads to ketoacid pro- duction, which in turn can produce a metabolic acidosis, although it is usually mild as a result of increased acid secretion by the kidney. In alcoholic ketoacidosis, which is much less common in children than in adults, the acidosis usually follows a combination of an alcoholic binge with vomiting and poor intake of food. The acidosis is potentially more severe than with isolated starvation, and the blood glucose level may be low, normal, or high. Hypoglycemia and acidosis also suggest an inborn error of metabolism. Kidney failure causes a metabolic acidosis because of the need for the kidneys to excrete the acid produced by normal metabolism. With mild or moderate chronic kidney disease, the remaining nephrons are usually able to compensate by increasing acid excretion. When the GFR is <20-30% of normal, the compensation is inadequate, and a metabolic acidosis develops. In some children, especially those with chronic kidney disease because of tubular damage, the acidosis devel- ops at a higher GFR because of a concurrent defect in acid secretion by the distal tubule (distal RTA). A variety of toxic ingestions can cause a metabolic acidosis (see Chapter 94). Salicylate intoxication is now much less common because aspirin is no longer recommended for fever control in children. Acute salicylate intoxication occurs after a large overdose. Chronic salicylate intoxication is possible with gradual buildup of the drug. Especially in adults, respiratory alkalosis may be the dominant acid-base distur- bance. In children, the metabolic acidosis is usually the more significant finding. Other symptoms of salicylate intoxication are fever, seizures, lethargy, and coma. Hyperventilation may be particularly marked. Tin- nitus, vertigo, and hearing impairment are more likely with chronic salicylate intoxication. Ethylene glycol, a component of antifreeze, is converted in the liver to glyoxylic and oxalic acids, causing a severe metabolic acidosis. Excessive oxalate excretion causes calcium oxalate crystals to appear in the urine, and calcium oxalate precipitation in the kidney tubules can cause kidney failure. The toxicity of methanol ingestion also depends on liver metabolism; formic acid is the toxic end product that causes the metabolic acidosis and other sequelae, which include damage to the optic nerve and CNS. Symptoms may include nausea, emesis, visual impairment, and altered mental status. Toluene inhalation and par- aldehyde ingestion are other potential causes of a metabolic acidosis. Many inborn errors of metabolism cause a metabolic acidosis (see Chapters 104-107). The metabolic acidosis may be the result of exces- sive production of ketoacids, lactic acid, and other organic anions. Some patients have accompanying hypoglycemia or hyperammone- mia. In most patients, the acidosis occurs episodically during acute decompensations, which may be precipitated by ingestion of specific dietary substrates, the stress of a mild illness, or poor compliance with dietary or medical therapy. In a few inborn errors of metabolism, patients have a chronic metabolic acidosis. Clinical Manifestations The underlying disorder usually produces most of the signs and symp- toms in children with a mild or moderate metabolic acidosis. The clini- cal manifestations of the acidosis are related to the degree of acidemia; patients with appropriate respiratory compensation and less severe acidemia have fewer manifestations than those with a concomitant respiratory acidosis. At a serum pH <7.2, there may be impaired car- diac contractility and an increased risk of arrhythmias, especially if underlying heart disease or other predisposing electrolyte disorders are present. With acidemia, there may be a decrease in the cardiovascular response to catecholamines, potentially exacerbating hypotension in children with volume depletion or shock. Acidemia causes vasocon- striction of the pulmonary vasculature, which is especially problem- atic in newborn infants with persistent pulmonary hypertension (see The normal respiratory response to metabolic acidosis-compensa- tory hyperventilation— may be subtle with mild metabolic acidosis, but it causes discernible increased respiratory effort with worsen- ing acidemia. The acute metabolic effects of acidemia include insulin resistance, increased protein degradation, and reduced ATP synthesis. Chronic metabolic acidosis causes failure to thrive in children. Aci- demia causes potassium to move from the ICS to the ECS, thereby increasing the serum [K*]. Severe acidemia impairs brain metabolism, eventually resulting in lethargy and coma. Diagnosis The etiology of a metabolic acidosis is often apparent from the history and physical examination. Acutely, diarrhea and shock are common causes of a metabolic acidosis. Shock, which causes a lactic acidosis, is usually apparent on physical examination and can be secondary thrive suggests a chronic metabolic acidosis, as with renal insufficiency or RTA. New onset of polyuria occurs in children with undiagnosed diabetes mellitus and DKA. Metabolic acidosis with seizures and/ or a depressed sensorium, especially in an infant, warrants consider- ation of an inborn error of metabolism. Meningitis and sepsis with lactic acidosis are more common explanations for metabolic acidosis with neurologic signs and symptoms. Identification of a toxic inges- tion (e.g., ethylene glycol, methanol) is especially important because of the potentially excellent response to specific therapy. A variety of medications can cause a metabolic acidosis, whether prescribed or accidentally ingested. Hepatomegaly and metabolic acidosis may occur in children with sepsis, congenital or acquired heart disease, hepatic failure, or inborn errors of metabolism. Basic laboratory tests in a child with a metabolic acidosis should include measurements of BUN, serum creatinine, serum glucose, uri- nalysis, and serum electrolytes. Metabolic acidosis, hyperglycemia, gly- cosuria, and ketonuria support a diagnosis of DKA. Starvation causes ketosis, but the metabolic acidosis, if present, is usually mild (HCO3 >18 mEq/L). Most children with ketosis from poor intake and meta- bolic acidosis have a concomitant disorder, such as gastroenteritis with diarrhea, that explains the metabolic acidosis. Alternatively, metabolic acidosis with or without ketosis occurs in inborn errors of metabolism; patients with these disorders may have hyperglycemia, normoglycemia, or hypoglycemia. Adrenal insufficiency may cause metabolic acidosis and hypoglycemia. Metabolic acidosis with hypoglycemia also occurs with liver failure. Metabolic acidosis, normoglycemia, and occur in children when type II RTA is part of Fanconi syndrome; the defect in resorption of glucose by the proximal tubule of the kidney causes the glycosuria. The serum K+ is often abnormal in children with a metabolic aci- dosis. Even though a metabolic acidosis causes potassium to move from the ICS to the ECS, many patients with a metabolic acidosis have a low serum [K*] because of excessive body losses of K*. With diar- rhea, there are high stool losses of K* and, often, secondary renal losses of K+, whereas in type I or type II RTA, there are increased urinary losses of Kt. In DKA, urinary losses of K+ are high, but the shift of Kt out of cells because of a lack of insulin and metabolic acidosis is especially significant. Consequently, the initial serum [K*] can be low, normal, or high, even though total body K* is almost always decreased. The serum [K*] is usually increased in patients with acidosis caused 

Normal plasma UC Acidosis (no gap) UC Acidosis (gap) UC UA UA НСОз UA СОз™ HCO3 Na+ Na+ Na+ CI- CI- CI- Fig. 73.11 Anion gap. The anion gap is the difference between the sodium concentration and the combined concentrations of chloride and bicarbonate (vertical black bars). In both a gap and a nongap meta- bolic acidosis, there is a decrease in the bicarbonate concentration. There is an increase in unmeasured anions (UA) in patients with a gap metabolic acidosis. In a nongap metabolic acidosis, there is an increase in the serum chloride concentration. UC, Unmeasured cations. by renal insufficiency; urinary K+ excretion is impaired. The combina- tion of metabolic acidosis, hyperkalemia, and hyponatremia occurs in patients with severe aldosterone deficiency (adrenogenital syndrome) or aldosterone resistance. Patients with less severe, type IV RTA often have only hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis. Very ill children with metabolic acidosis may have an elevated serum K+ because of a combi- nation of renal insufficiency, tissue breakdown, and a shift of K+ from the ICS to the ECS secondary to the metabolic acidosis. The plasma anion gap is useful for evaluating patients with a meta- bolic acidosis. It divides patients into two diagnostic groups, those with normal anion gap and those with increased anion gap. The following formula determines the anion gap: Anion gap = [Na *] - ([CI] + (HCO3 *]) A normal anion gap is 4-11, although there is variation among labo- ratories. Approximately 11 mEq of the anion gap is normally secondary to albumin. A 1 g/dL decrease in the albumin concentration decreases the anion gap by approximately 2.5 mEq/L. Thus, if the albumin is not close to 4 g/dL, the anion gap should be corrected for the albumin concentration: Anion gap (corrected for albumin) = Na* - ([Cl-] + [HCO3 - ]) + [2.5 x (4 - observed albumin)] The number of serum anions must equal the number of serum cat- ions to maintain electrical neutrality (Fig. 73.11). The anion gap is the difference between the measured cation (Nat) and the measured anions (Cl + bicarbonate). The anion gap is also the difference between the unmeasured cations (K*, magnesium, calcium) and the unmeasured anions (albumin, phosphate, urate, sulfate). An increased anion gap occurs when there is an increase in unmeasured anions. With a lac- tic acidosis, there is endogenous production of lactic acid, which is composed of positively charged hydrogen ions and negatively charged lactate anions. The hydrogen ions are largely buffered by serum bicar- bonate, resulting in a decrease in [HCO3*]. The hydrogen ions that are not buffered by bicarbonate cause the serum pH to decrease. The lac- tate anions remain, causing the increase in the anion gap. Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 517 An increase in unmeasured anions, along with Ht: generation, is present in all causes of an increased gap metabolic acidosis (see Table 73.13). In DKA, the ketoacids B-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate are the unmeasured anions. In kidney failure there is retention of unmea- sured anions, including phosphate, urate, and sulfate. The increase in unmeasured anions in kidney failure is usually less than the decrease in [HCO3*]. Kidney failure is thus a mix of an increased-gap and a normal-gap metabolic acidosis. The normal-gap metabolic acidosis is especially prominent in children with kidney failure because of tubular damage, as occurs with renal dysplasia or obstructive uropathy, because these patients have a concurrent RTA. The unmeasured anions in toxic ingestions vary: formate in methanol intoxication, glycolate in ethylene glycol intoxication, and lactate and ketoacids in salicylate intoxication. In inborn errors of metabolism, the unmeasured anions depend on the specific etiology and may include ketoacids, lactate, and other organic anions. In a few inborn errors of metabolism, the acidosis occurs with- out generation of unmeasured anions; thus the anion gap is normal. A normal-anion gap metabolic acidosis occurs when there is a decrease in [HCO,] without an increase in the unmeasured anions. With diarrhea, there is a loss of bicarbonate in the stool, causing a decrease in the serum pH and [HCO3 ]; the serum [Cl ] increases to maintain electrical neutrality (see Fig. 73.11). Hyperchloremic meta- bolic acidosis is an alternative term for a normal-anion gap metabolic acidosis. Calculation of the anion gap is more precise than using (CI ] to differentiate between a normal-gap and an increased-gap meta- bolic acidosis, in that the anion gap directly determines the presence of unmeasured anions. Electrical neutrality dictates that the [CI] increases or decreases according to the serum [Na*], making [Cl] a less reliable predictor of unmeasured anions than the more direct mea- sure, calculation of the anion gap. An increase in unmeasured cations, such as calcium, potassium, and magnesium, decreases the anion gap. Conversely, a decrease in unmeasured cations is a very unusual cause of an increased anion gap Because of these variables, the broad range of a normal anion gap, and other variables, the presence of a normal or an increased anion gap is not always reliable in differentiating among the causes of a meta- bolic acidosis, especially when the metabolic acidosis is mild. In some patients, there is more than one explanation for the metabolic acidosis, such as the child with diarrhea and lactic acidosis as a result of poor perfusion. The anion gap should not be interpreted in dogmatic isola- tion; consideration of other laboratory abnormalities and the clinical history improves its diagnostic utility. Treatment The most effective therapeutic approach for patients with a metabolic acidosis is repair of the underlying disorder, if possible. The administra- tion of insulin in DKA and the restoration of adequate perfusion with IV fluids in lactic acidosis because of hypovolemia or shock eventually result in normalization of the acid-base balance. In other diseases, the use of bicarbonate therapy is indicated because the underlying disor- der is irreparable. Children with metabolic acidosis caused by RTA or chronic kidney disease require long-term base therapy. Patients with acute kidney injury and metabolic acidosis may need base therapy until their kidneys ability to excrete hydrogen normalizes. In other disorders the cause of the metabolic acidosis eventually resolves, but base therapy may be necessary during the acute illness. In salicylate poisoning, alkali administration increases renal clearance of salicylate and decreases the amount of salicylate in brain cells. Short-term base therapy is often necessary in other poisonings (ethylene glycol, metha- nol) and inborn errors of metabolism (pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, propionic acidemia). Some inborn errors of metabolism require long- term base therapy. The use of base therapy in DKA with lactic acidosis is controver- sial; there is little evidence that it improves patient outcome, and it has a variety of potential side effects. The risks of giving sodium bicarbonate 

518 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders include the possibility of causing hypernatremia or volume overload. Furthermore, the patient may have overcorrection of the metabolic acidosis once the underlying disorder resolves, because metabolism of lactate or ketoacids generates bicarbonate. The rapid change from acidemia to alkalemia can cause a variety of problems, including hypo- kalemia and hypophosphatemia. Bicarbonate therapy increases the generation of COz, which can accumulate in patients with respiratory failure. Because CO, readily diffuses into cells, the administration of bicarbonate can lower the intracellular pH, potentially worsening cell function. Base therapy is usually reserved for children with severe acute lactic acidosis and severe DKA. Oral base therapy is given to children with chronic metabolic acido- sis. Sodium bicarbonate tablets are available for older children. Younger children generally take citrate solutions; the liver generates bicarbonate from citrate. Citrate solutions are available as sodium citrate, potas- sium citrate, and a 1:1 mix of sodium citrate and potassium citrate. The patient's potassium needs dictate the choice. Children with type I or type II RTA may have hypokalemia and benefit from potassium supplements, but most children with chronic kidney failure cannot tol- erate additional potassium. Oral or IV base can be used in acute metabolic acidosis; IV therapy is generally used when a rapid response is necessary. Sodium bicar- bonate may be given as a bolus, usually at a dose of 1 mEq/kg, in an emergency situation. Another approach is to add sodium bicarbonate or sodium acetate to the patients IV fluids, remembering to remove an equal amount of sodium chloride from the solution to avoid giv- ing an excessive sodium load. Careful monitoring is mandatory so that the dose of base can be titrated appropriately. Tris(hydroxymethyl) aminomethane (tromethamine, THAM) is an option in patients with a metabolic acidosis and a respiratory acidosis, because it neutralizes acids without releasing CO2. THAM also diffuses into cells and there- fore provides intracellular buffering. Hemodialysis is another option for correcting a metabolic acido- sis, and it is an appropriate choice in patients with renal insufficiency, especially if significant uremia or hyperkalemia is also present. Hemo- dialysis is advantageous for correcting the metabolic acidosis caused by methanol or ethylene glycol intoxication, because hemodialysis effi- ciently removes the offending toxin. In addition, these patients often have a severe metabolic acidosis that does not respond easily to IV bicarbonate therapy. Peritoneal dialysis is another option for correct- ing the metabolic acidosis due to chronic kidney disease. Many causes of metabolic acidosis require specific therapy. Admin- istration of a glucocorticoid and a mineralocorticoid is necessary in patients with adrenal insufficiency. Patients with DKA require insu- lin therapy, whereas patients with lactic acidosis respond to mea- sures that alleviate tissue hypoxia. Along with correction of acidosis, patients with methanol or ethylene glycol ingestion should receive an agent that prevents the breakdown of the toxic substance to its toxic metabolites. Fomepizole has supplanted ethanol as the treatment of choice. These agents work by inhibiting alcohol dehydrogenase, the enzyme that performs the first step in the metabolism of ethylene glycol or methanol. There are a variety of disease-specific therapies for patients with a metabolic acidosis resulting from an inborn error of metabolism. METABOLIC ALKALOSIS Metabolic alkalosis in children is most often secondary to emesis or diuretic use. The serum bicarbonate concentration is increased with a metabolic alkalosis, although a respiratory acidosis also leads to a com- pensatory elevation of the serum [HCO,*]. With a simple metabolic alkalosis, however, the pH is elevated; alkalemia is present. Patients with a respiratory acidosis are acidemic. Decreasing ventilation causes appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic alkalosis. Pcoz increases by 7 mm Hg for each 10 mEq/L increase in the serum [HCO,*]. Appropriate respiratory compensation never exceeds a PcO2 of 55-60 mm Hg. The patient has a concurrent respiratory alkalosis Table 73.14 Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis CHLORIDE-RESPONSIVE (URINARY CHLORIDE <15 MEQ/L) Gastric losses Emesis Nasogastric suction Diuretics (loop or thiazide) Chloride-losing diarrhea (OMIM 214700) Low chloride formula Cystic fibrosis (OMIM 219700) Posthypercapnia CHLORIDE-RESISTANT (URINARY CHLORIDE >20 MEQ/L) High Blood Pressure Adrenal adenoma or hyperplasia Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism/Familial hyperaldosteronism type I (OMIM 103900) Familial hyperaldosteronism type II (OMIM 605635) Familial hyperaldosteronism type III (OMIM 613677) Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV (OMIM 617027) Renovascular disease Renin-secreting tumor 17a-Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202110) 11ß-Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202010) Cushing syndrome 11B-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 218030) Licorice ingestion Liddle syndrome (OMIM 177200) Normal Blood Pressure Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800) Bartter syndrome (OMIM 241200/607364/602522/601678/300971/60 1198/613090) Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200) EAST syndrome (OMIM 612780) Hyperuricemia, Pulmonary Hypertension, Renal Failure in Infancy and Alkalosis, HUPRA Syndrome (OMIM 613845) Autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia due to RRAGD variant (OMIM not assigned) Base administration EAST, Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go v/omim). if the Pco, is lower than the expected compensation. A greater than expected Pcoz occurs with a concurrent respiratory acidosis. Etiology and Pathophysiology The kidneys normally respond promptly to a metabolic alkalosis by increasing base excretion. Two processes are therefore usually present to produce a metabolic alkalosis: (1) the generation of the metabolic alkalosis, which requires the addition of base to the body, and (2) the maintenance of the metabolic alkalosis, which requires impairment in the kidney's ability to excrete base. The etiologies of a metabolic alkalosis are divided into two catego- ries based on the urinary chloride level (Table 73.14). The alkalosis in patients with a low urinary [Cl is maintained by volume deple- tion; thus volume repletion is necessary for correction of the alkalosis. The volume depletion in these patients is caused by losses of Nat and K+, but the loss of Cl is usually greater than the losses of Na* and K+ combined. Because Cl- losses are the dominant cause of the volume depletion, these patients require Cl to correct the volume depletion and metabolic alkalosis; they are said to have Cl -responsive meta- bolic alkalosis. In contrast, the alkalosis in a patient with an elevated urinary [CI] does not respond to volume repletion and so is termed Cl--resistant metabolic alkalosis. 

Emesis or nasogastric suction results in loss of gastric fluid, which has a high content of HCl. Generation of Ht by the gastric mucosa causes simultaneous release of bicarbonate into the bloodstream. Nor- mally, the hydrogen ions in gastric fluid are reclaimed in the small intestine (by neutralizing secreted bicarbonate); thus there is no net loss of acid. With loss of gastric fluid, this does not occur, and a meta- bolic alkalosis develops. This period is the generation phase of the met- The maintenance phase of the metabolic alkalosis from gastric losses is caused by the volume depletion ("chloride depletion" gastric loss of HCI). Volume depletion interferes with urinary loss of bicarbonate, the normal renal response to a metabolic alkalosis. During volume depletion, several mechanisms prevent renal bicar- bonate loss. First, there is a reduction in the GFR, so less bicar- bonate is filtered. Second, volume depletion increases resorption of sodium and bicarbonate in the proximal tubule, limiting the amount of bicarbonate that can be excreted in the urine. This effect is mediated by angiotensin II and adrenergic stimulation of the kidney, both of which are increased in response to volume deple- tion. Third, the increase in aldosterone during volume depletion increases bicarbonate resorption and Ht secretion in the collecting In addition to volume depletion, gastric losses are usually associ- ated with hypokalemia as a result of both gastric loss of K+ and, most importantly, increased urinary K+ losses. The increased urinary losses of Kt are mediated by aldosterone, through volume depletion, and by the increase in intracellular K+ secondary to the metabolic alkalosis, which causes K+ to move into the cells of the kidney, causing increased K* excretion. Hypokalemia contributes to the maintenance of the met- abolic alkalosis by decreasing bicarbonate loss. Hypokalemia increases Ht secretion in the distal nephron and stimulates ammonia production in the proximal tubule. Ammonia production enhances renal excretion A metabolic alkalosis can develop in patients receiving loop or thiazide diuretics. Diuretic use leads to volume depletion, which increases angiotensin II, aldosterone, and adrenergic stimulation of the kidney. Diuretics increase the delivery of sodium to the distal nephron, further enhancing acid excretion. Moreover, these diuret- ics cause hypokalemia, which increases acid excretion by the kid- ney. The increase in renal acid excretion generates the metabolic alkalosis, and the decrease in bicarbonate loss maintains it. In addi- tos, patients who are receiving diuretics have a "contraction alka- Diuretic use causes fluid loss without bicarbonate; thus the remaining body bicarbonate is contained in a smaller total body fluid compartment. The [HCO, ] increases, helping to generate the metabolic alkalosis. Diuretics are often used in patients with edema, such as those with nephrotic syndrome, heart failure, or liver failure. In many of these patients, metabolic alkalosis resulting from diuretic use devel- ops despite the continued presence of edema. This is because the effective intravascular volume is low, and it is the effective intra- vascular volume that stimulates the compensatory mechanisms that cause and maintain a metabolic alkalosis. Many of these patients have a decreased effective intravascular volume before they begin diuretic therapy, increasing the likelihood of diuretic-induced met- abolic alkalosis. Diuretic use increases chloride excretion in the urine. Conse- quently, while a patient is receiving diuretics, the urine [CI] is typically high (>20 mEq/L). After the diuretic effect has worn off, the urinary [CI] is low (<15 mEq/L) because of appropriate renal Cl- retention in response to volume depletion. Thus categorization of diuretics because of urinary [Cl depends on the timing of the measurement. However, the metabolic alkalosis from diuretics is CI- responsive; it is corrected after adequate volume repletion. This is the rationale for including this process among the chloride-responsive causes of a metabolic alkalosis. Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 519 Most patients with diarrhea have a metabolic acidosis because of stool losses of bicarbonate. In chloride-losing diarrhea, an auto- somal recessive disorder, there is a defect in the normal intestinal exchange of bicarbonate for chloride, causing excessive stool losses of chloride (see Chapter 385). In addition, stool losses of H* and K+ cause metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia, both of which are exac- erbated by increased renal H+ and K+ losses from volume depletion. Treatment is with oral supplements of K* and NaCl. Use of a gastric proton pump inhibitor (PPI), by decreasing gastric HCl production, reduces both the volume of diarrhea and the need for electrolyte supplementation. Formulas with extremely low Cl content have led to Cl defi- ciency and volume depletion. There is secondary metabolic alka- losis and hypokalemia. Cystic fibrosis can rarely cause metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia, and hyponatremia because of excessive NaCl losses in sweat (see Chapter 454). The volume depletion causes the metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia through increased urinary losses, whereas the hyponatremia, a less common finding, is secondary to Na* loss combined with renal water conservation in an effort to protect the intravascular volume ("appropriate" ADH production). A posthypercapnic metabolic alkalosis occurs after the cor- rection of a chronic respiratory acidosis. This is typically seen in patients with chronic lung disease who are started on mechanical ventilation. During chronic respiratory acidosis, appropriate renal compensation leads to an increase in the serum [HCO3 ]. Because it is still present after acute correction of the respiratory acidosis, the elevated [HCO3 ] causes a metabolic alkalosis. The metabolic alka- losis persists because the patient with a chronic respiratory acido- sis is intravascularly depleted because of the Cl- loss that occurred during the initial metabolic compensation for the primary respira- tory acidosis. In addition, many children with a chronic respiratory acidosis receive diuretics, which further decrease the intravascular volume. The metabolic alkalosis responds to correction of the intra- vascular volume deficit. The chloride-resistant causes of metabolic alkalosis can be subdi- vided according to blood pressure status. Patients with hypertension either have increased aldosterone levels or act as if they do. Aldosterone levels are elevated in children with adrenal adenomas or hyperplasia. Aldosterone causes renal retention of sodium, with resultant hyper- tension. Metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia result from aldosterone- mediated renal excretion of H* and K*. The urinary Cl level is not low because these patients are volume overloaded, not volume depleted. The volume expansion and hypertension allow normal excretion of Nat and Cl despite the presence of aldosterone. This is known as the mineralocorticoid escape phenomenon. In glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism, an dominant disorder, excess production of aldosterone results from the presence of an aldosterone synthase gene regulated by adreno- corticotropic hormone (ACTH) (see Chapter 616.8). Glucocorticoids effectively treat this disorder by inhibiting ACTH production by the pituitary, downregulating the inappropriate aldosterone production. Familial hyperaldosteronism type II, which causes elevated aldoste- rone levels, responds to spironolactone. Familial hyperaldosteronism type Ill typically requires bilateral adrenalectomy due to the severity of the hyperaldosteronism. Renovascular disease and renin-secreting tumors both cause excessive renin, leading to an increase in aldo- sterone, although hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis are less com- mon findings than hypertension. In two forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 11p-hydroxylase denciency and 17a-hydroxylase deficiency, there is excessive production of the mineralocorticoid 11-deoxycorticosterone (see Chapters 616.2 and 616.4). Hyperten- sion, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis are more likely in 17a- hydroxylase deficiency than in 11ß-hydroxylase deficiency. These disorders respond to glucocorticoids because the excess production of 11-deoxycorticosterone is under the control of ACTH. 

520 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Cushing syndrome frequently causes hypertension. Cortisol has some mineralocorticoid activity, and high levels can produce hypoka- lemia and metabolic alkalosis in patients with Cushing syndrome. Cortisol can bind to the mineralocorticoid receptors in the kid- ney and function as a mineralocorticoid. This binding normally does not occur because 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the kidney converts cortisol to cortisone, which does not bind to the mineralocorticoid receptor. In the autosomal recessive disorder 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency, also called apparent mineralocorticoid excess, cortisol is not converted in the kidney to cortisone. Cortisol is therefore available to bind to the miner- alocorticoid receptor in the kidney and act as a mineralocorticoid. Patients with this deficiency, despite low levels of aldosterone, are hypertensive and hypokalemic, and they have a metabolic alkalosis. The same phenomenon can occur with excessive intake of natural licorice, a component of which, glycyrrhizic acid, inhibits 11ß- hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The autosomal dominant disorder Liddle syndrome is secondary to an activating variant in the gene for the sodium channel in the distal nephron (see Chapter 571.3). Upregulation of this sodium channel is one of the principal actions of aldosterone. Because this Nat channel is continuously open, chil- dren with Liddle syndrome have the features of hyperaldosteron- ism, including hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis, Bartter and Gitelman syndromes are autosomal recessive disor- ders associated with normal blood pressure, elevated urinary Cl, metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia (see Chapter 571). In Bart- ter syndrome, patients have a defect in Nat and Cl resorption in the loop of Henle. This leads to excessive urinary losses of Na+ and Cl, and as in patients receiving loop diuretics, volume deple- tion and secondary hyperaldosteronism occur, causing hypokale- mia and metabolic alkalosis. Gitelman syndrome is usually milder than Bartter syndrome. Patients have renal Nat and Cl wasting with volume depletion caused by variants in the gene encoding the thiazide-sensitive Na*-Cl transporter in the distal tubule. As in patients receiving a thiazide diuretic, affected patients have volume depletion and secondary hyperaldosteronism with hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Children with Gitelman syndrome have hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia. Some patients with autoso- mal dominant hypoparathyroidism have hypokalemia and meta- bolic alkalosis from impaired Nat and Cl resorption in the loop of Henle. EAST syndrome causes hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and hypomagnesemia. Excessive base intake can cause a metabolic alkalosis. Affected patients do not have low urine [Cl-], unless there is associated vol- ume depletion. In the absence of volume depletion, excess base is rapidly corrected via renal excretion of bicarbonate. Rarely, massive base intake can cause a metabolic alkalosis by overwhelming the kidney's ability to excrete bicarbonate. This may occur in infants who are given baking soda as a "home remedy" for colic or stom- ach upset. Each teaspoon of baking soda has 42 mEq of sodium bicarbonate. Infants have increased vulnerability because of a lower GFR, limiting the rate of compensatory renal bicarbonate excretion. A metabolic alkalosis may also occur in patients who receive a large amount of sodium bicarbonate during cardiopulmonary resus- citation. Blood products are anticoagulated with citrate, which is converted into bicarbonate by the liver. Patients who receive large amounts of blood products may have a metabolic alkalosis. lat- rogenic metabolic alkalosis can occur because of acetate in TPN. Aggressive use of bicarbonate therapy in a child with a lactic aci- dosis or DKA may cause a metabolic alkalosis. This is especially likely in a patient in whom the underlying cause of the lactic aci- dosis is successfully corrected (restoration of intravascular volume in a patient with severe dehydration). Once the cause of the lactic acidosis resolves, lactate can be converted by the liver into bicar- bonate, which when combined with infused bicarbonate can create a metabolic alkalosis. A similar phenomenon can occur in a child with DKA because the administration of insulin allows ketoacids to be metabolized, producing bicarbonate. However, this phenome- non rarely occurs because of judicious use of bicarbonate therapy in DKA and because there are usually significant pretreatment losses of ketoacids in the urine, preventing massive regeneration of bicar- bonate. Base administration is most likely to cause a metabolic alka- losis in patients who have an impaired ability to excrete bicarbonate in the urine. This impairment occurs in patients with concurrent volume depletion or renal insufficiency. Clinical Manifestations The symptoms in patients with a metabolic alkalosis are often related to the underlying disease and associated electrolyte disturbances. Children with Cl -responsive causes of metabolic alkalosis often have symptoms related to volume depletion, such as thirst and lethargy. In contrast, children with Cl -unresponsive causes may have symptoms related to hypertension. Alkalemia causes potassium to shift into the ICS, producing a decrease in the extracellular [K*]. Alkalemia leads to increased urinary losses of K+. Increased K+ losses are present in many of the conditions that cause a metabolic alkalosis. Therefore most patients with a meta- bolic alkalosis have hypokalemia, and their symptoms may be related to the hypokalemia (see Chapter 73.4). The symptoms of a metabolic alkalosis are caused by the associated alkalemia. The magnitude of the alkalemia is related to the severity of the metabolic alkalosis and the presence of concurrent respiratory acid-base disturbances. During alkalemia, the ionized calcium concen- tration decreases because of increased binding of calcium to albumin. The decrease in the ionized calcium concentration may cause symp- toms of tetany (carpopedal spasm). Arrhythmias are a potential complication of a metabolic alkalosis, and the risk for arrhythmia increases if there is concomitant hypo- kalemia. Alkalemia increases the risk of digoxin toxicity, and antiar- rhythmic medications are less effective in the presence of alkalemia. In addition, alkalemia may decrease cardiac output. A metabolic alkalosis causes a compensatory increase in the Pco, by decreasing ventilation. The decrease in ventilatory drive can cause hypoxia. Diagnosis Measurement of the urine [CI] is the most helpful test in differen- tiating among the causes of a metabolic alkalosis. The urine [CI] is low in patients with a metabolic alkalosis resulting from volume depletion, unless there is a defect in renal handling of Cl. The urine [CI] is superior to the urine [Na*] in assessment of volume status in patients with a metabolic alkalosis because the normal renal response to a metabolic alkalosis is to excrete bicarbonate. Because bicarbonate is negatively charged, it can only be excreted with cations, usually Nat and K+. Therefore a patient with a meta- bolic alkalosis may excrete Nat in the urine despite the presence of volume depletion, which normally causes avid Nat retention. The urine [Cl] is usually a good indicator of volume status, and it dif- ferentiates Cl -resistant and Cl -responsive causes of a metabolic Diuretics and gastric losses are the most common causes of meta- bolic alkalosis and are usually apparent from the patient history. Occasionally, metabolic alkalosis, usually with hypokalemia, may be a clue to the presence of bulimia or surreptitious diuretic use (see Chapter 41). Patients with bulimia have a low urine Cl level, indicating that they have volume depletion because of an extrarenal etiology, but there is no alternative explanation for their volume depletion. Surreptitious diuretic use may be diagnosed by obtaining a urine toxicology screen for diuretics. The urine |CI] is increased while a patient is using diuretics but is low when the patient stops taking them. Rarely, children with mild Bartter or Gitelman syn- drome are misdiagnosed as having bulimia or abusing diuretics. The 

urine [Cl-] is always elevated in Bartter and Gitelman syndromes, and the urine toxicology screen for diuretics has a negative result. Metabolic alkalosis with hypokalemia is occasionally the initial manifestation of cystic fibrosis. An elevated sweat Cl finding is Patients with a metabolic alkalosis and a high urinary [CI] are subdivided according to blood pressure status. Children with nor- mal blood pressure may have Bartter or Gitelman syndrome. Excess base administration is another diagnostic possibility, but it is usu- ally apparent from the history. In patients with sodium bicarbonate ingestion (baking soda), which may be unreported by the parent, the metabolic alkalosis usually occurs with significant hypernatremia. In addition, unless volume depletion is superimposed, the metabolic alkalosis from base ingestion resolves itself once the source of base Measuring serum concentrations of renin and aldosterone differ- entiates children with a metabolic alkalosis, a high urinary [Cl ], and pressure. Both renin and aldosterone are elevated in children with either renovascular disease or a renin-secreting tumor. Aldosterone is high and renin is low in patients with adrenal adenomas or hyperplasia and glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism. Renin and aldosterone are low in children with Cushing syndrome, Liddle syndrome, licorice ingestion, and 17a-hydroxylase, 11ß-hydroxylase, and 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiencies. An elevated 24- hour urine cortisol value is diagnostic of Cushing syndrome, which is suspected from the presence of the other classic features of this dis- ease (see Chapter 619). Elevations of 11-deoxycorticosterone values are seen in 17a-hydroxylase and 11ß-hydroxylase deficiency. Treatment The approach to treatment of metabolic alkalosis depends on the sever- ity of the alkalosis and the underlying etiology. In children with a mild metabolic alkalosis ([HCO3 ] <32 mEq/L), intervention is often unnec- essary, although this depends on the specific circumstances. In a child with congenital heart disease who is receiving a stable dose of a loop diuretic, a mild alkalosis does not require treatment. In contrast, inter- vention may be appropriate in a child with a worsening mild metabolic alkalosis because of nasogastric suction. The presence of a concurrent respiratory acid-base disturbance also influences therapeutic decision- making. A patient with a concurrent respiratory acidosis should have some increase in bicarbonate from metabolic compensation; thus the severity of the pH elevation is more important than [HCO3 ]. In con- trast, a patient with respiratory alkalosis and a metabolic alkalosis is at risk for severe alkalemia; treatment may be indicated, even if the increase in bicarbonate value is only mild. Intervention is usually necessary in children with moderate or severe metabolic alkalosis. The most effective approach is to address the under- lying etiology. In some children, nasogastric suction may be decreased or discontinued. Alternatively, the addition of a gastric PPI reduces gastric secretion and losses of HCl. Diuretics are an important cause of meta- bolic alkalosis, and if a change is tolerated, they should be eliminated or the dose reduced. Adequate potassium supplementation or the addition of a potassium-sparing diuretic is also helpful in a child with a metabolic alkalosis from diuretics. Potassium-sparing diuretics not only decrease renal K+ losses but, by blocking the action of aldosterone, also decrease H+ secretion in the distal nephron, increasing urinary bicarbonate excre- tion. Many children cannot tolerate discontinuation of diuretic therapy; hence, potassium supplementation and potassium-sparing diuretics are the principal therapeutic approach. Arginine HCl may also be used to treat chloride-responsive metabolic acidosis if sodium or potassium salts are not appropriate. Arginine HCl may raise the serum K+ levels dur- ing administration. Rarely, in cases of severe metabolic alkalosis, acet- azolamide is an option. A carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, acetazolamide decreases resorption of bicarbonate in the proximal tubule, causing signifcant bicarbonate loss in the urine. The patient receiving this drug Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 521 must be monitored closely, because acetazolamide produces major losses of potassium in the urine and increases fluid losses, potentially neces- sitating a reduction in dosage of other diuretics. Most children with a metabolic alkalosis have one of the chloride- responsive etiologies. In these situations, administration of sufficient sodium chloride and potassium chloride to correct the volume deficit and the potassium deficit is necessary to correct the metabolic alkalosis. This approach may not be an option in the child who has volume depletion due to diuretics, because volume repletion may be contraindicated. Adequate replacement of gastric losses of sodium and potassium in a child with a nasogastric tube can minimize or prevent the development of the meta- bolic alkalosis. With adequate intravascular volume and a normal serum K*], the kidney excretes the excess bicarbonate within 2 days. In children with the chloride-resistant causes of a metabolic alkalosis that are associated with hypertension, volume repletion is contraindicated because it would exacerbate the hypertension and would not repair the metabolic alkalosis. Ideally, treatment focuses on eliminating the excess aldosterone effect. Adrenal adenomas can be resected, licorice intake can be eliminated, and renovascular dis- ease can be repaired. Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism, 17a- hydroxylase deficiency, and 11ß-hydroxylase deficiency respond to the administration of glucocorticoids. The mineralocorticoid effect of cortisol in 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency can be decreased with the use of spironolactone, which blocks the miner- alocorticoid receptor. In contrast, the metabolic alkalosis in children with Liddle syndrome does not respond to spironolactone; however, either triamterene or amiloride is effective therapy because both agents block the sodium channel that is constitutively active in Liddle syndrome. In children with Bartter or Gitelman syndrome, therapy includes oral potassium and sodium supplementation; potassium-sparing diuretics may be helpful in select cases. Children with Gitelman syndrome often require magnesium supplementation, whereas children with severe Bartter syndrome often benefit from indomethacin. RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS A respiratory acidosis is an inappropriate increase in blood carbon diox- ide tension (Pcoz). CO, is a by-product of metabolism and is removed from the body by the lungs. During a respiratory acidosis, the effective- ness of CO, removal by the lungs is decreased. A respiratory acidosis is secondary to either pulmonary disease, such as severe bronchiolitis, or nonpulmonary disease, such as a narcotic overdose (see Chapter 86). Even though body production of CO, can vary, normal lungs are able to accommodate this variation; excess production of CO, is not an isolated cause of a respiratory acidosis. With impairment of alveolar ventilation, the rate of body production of CO, may affect the severity of the respira- tory acidosis, but this is usually not a significant factor. A respiratory acidosis causes a decrease in the blood pH, but there is normally a metabolic response that partially compensates, minimizing the severity of the acidemia. The acute metabolic response to a respira- tory alkalosis occurs within minutes. The metabolic compensation for an acute respiratory acidosis is secondary to titration of acid by nonbi- carbonate buffers. This buffering of H* causes a predictable increase in the serum [HCO3 ]: Plasma bicarbonate increases by 1 for each 10 mm Hg increase in the Pcoz (acute compensation). With a chronic respiratory acidosis, there is more significant met- abolic compensation and thus less severe acidemia than in an acute respiratory acidosis with the same increase in Pcoz. During a chronic respiratory acidosis, the kidneys increase acid excretion. This response occurs over 3-4 days and causes a predictable increase in the serum [НСО,*): Plasma bicarbonate increases by 3.5 for each 10 mm Hg increase in the Pcoz (chronic compensation). The increase of serum [HCO3 ] during a chronic respiratory acido- sis is associated with a decrease in body chloride. After acute correction of a chronic respiratory acidosis, the plasma bicarbonate continues to 

522 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Table 73.15 Causes of Respiratory Acidosis CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DEPRESSION Encephalitis Head trauma Brain tumor Central sleep apnea Primary pulmonary hypoventilation (Ondine curse) Stroke Hypoxic brain damage Obesity-hypoventilation (Pickwickian) syndrome Increased intracranial pressure Medications Narcotics Barbiturates Anesthesia Benzodiazepines Propofol Alcohols DISORDERS OF SPINAL CORD, PERIPHERAL NERVES, OR NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION Diaphragmatic paralysis Guillain-Barré syndrome Poliomyelitis Acute flaccid myelitis Spinal muscular atrophies Tick paralysis Botulism Myasthenia Multiple sclerosis Spinal cord injury Medications Vecuronium Aminoglycosides Organophosphates (pesticides) RESPIRATORY MUSCLE WEAKNESS Muscular dystrophy Hypothyroidism Malnutrition Hypokalemia Hypophosphatemia Medications Succinylcholine Corticosteroids be increased, and the patient has a metabolic alkalosis. Because of the Cl- deficit, this is a chloride-responsive metabolic alkalosis; it corrects once the patients Cl deficit is replaced. A mixed disorder is present if the metabolic compensation is inap- propriate. A higher than expected bicarbonate value occurs in the set- ting of a concurrent metabolic alkalosis, and a lower than expected bicarbonate value occurs in the setting of a concurrent metabolic aci- dosis. Evaluating whether compensation is appropriate during a respi- ratory acidosis requires clinical knowledge of the acuity of the process, because the expected compensation is different, depending on whether the process is acute or chronic. The Pco, cannot be interpreted in isolation to determine whether a patient has a respiratory acidosis. A respiratory acidosis is always present if a patient has acidemia and an elevated Pcoz. However, an elevated Pco, also occurs as appropriate respiratory compensation for a simple metabolic alkalosis. The patient is alkalemic; this is not a respiratory acidosis. During a mixed disturbance, a patient can have a respiratory acidosis and a normal or even low Pcoz. This condi- tion may occur in a patient with a metabolic acidosis. A respiratory acidosis is present if the patient does not have appropriate respiratory PULMONARY DISEASE Pneumonia Pneumothorax Asthma Bronchiolitis Pulmonary edema Pulmonary hemorrhage Acute respiratory distress syndrome Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome Cystic fibrosis Bronchopulmonary dysplasia Hypoplastic lungs Meconium aspiration Pulmonary thromboembolus Interstitial fibrosis UPPER AIRWAY DISEASE Aspiration Laryngospasm Angioedema Obstructive sleep apnea Tonsillar hypertrophy Vocal cord paralysis Extrinsic tumor Extrinsic or intrinsic hemangioma MISCELLANEOUS Flail chest Cardiac arrest Kyphoscoliosis Decreased diaphragmatic movement due to ascites or peritoneal dialysis compensation (the Pco, is higher than expected from the severity of the metabolic acidosis). Etiology and Pathophysiology The causes of a respiratory acidosis are either pulmonary or nonpul- monary (Table 73.15). CNS disorders can decrease the activity of the central respiratory center, reducing ventilatory drive. A variety of med- ications and illicit drugs suppress the respiratory center. The signals from the respiratory center need to be transmitted to the respiratory muscles via the nervous system. Respiratory muscle failure can be sec- ondary to disruption of the signal from the CNS in the spinal cord, the phrenic nerve, or the neuromuscular junction. Disorders directly affecting the muscles of respiration can prevent adequate ventilation, causing a respiratory acidosis. Mild or moderate lung disease often causes a respiratory alkalosis as a result of hyperventilation secondary to hypoxia or stimulation of lung mechanoreceptors or chemoreceptors. Only more severe lung disease causes a respiratory acidosis. Upper airway diseases, by impairing air entry into the lungs, may decrease ventilation, producing a respiratory 

Increased production of CO, is never the sole cause of a respiratory acidosis, but it can increase the severity of the disease in a patient with decreased ventilation of CO2. Increased production of CO, occurs in patients with fever, hyperthyroidism, excess caloric intake, and high levels of physical activity. Increased respiratory muscle work also increases CO, production. Clinical Manifestations Patients with a respiratory acidosis are often tachypneic in an effort to correct the inadequate ventilation. Exceptions include patients with a respiratory acidosis resulting from CNS depression and patients who are on the verge of complete respiratory failure secondary to fatigue of the respiratory muscles. The symptoms of respiratory acidosis are related to the severity of the hypercarbia. Acute respiratory acidosis is usually more symptom- atic than chronic respiratory acidosis. Symptoms are also increased by concurrent hypoxia or metabolic acidosis. In a patient breathing room air, hypoxia is always present if a respiratory acidosis is present. The potential CNS manifestations of respiratory acidosis include anxiety, dizziness, headache, confusion, asterixis, myoclonic jerks, hallucina- tions, psychosis, coma, and seizures. Acidemia, no matter the etiology, affects the cardiovascular sys- tem. An arterial pH <7.2 impairs cardiac contractility and the nor- mal response to catecholamines in both the heart and the peripheral vasculature. Hypercapnia causes vasodilation, most dramatically in the cerebral vasculature, but hypercapnia produces vasoconstriction of the pulmonary circulation. Respiratory acidosis increases the risk of cardiac arrhythmias, especially in a child with underlying cardiac disease. Diagnosis The history and physical findings often point to a clear etiology. For the obtunded patient with poor respiratory effort, evaluation of the CNS is often indicated. This may include imaging studies (CT or MRI) and, potentially, a lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid analysis. A toxicology screen for illicit drugs may also be appro- priate. A response to naloxone is both diagnostic and therapeutic. In many of the diseases affecting the respiratory muscles, there is evidence of weakness in other muscles. Stridor is a clue that the child may have upper airway disease. Along with a physical exami- nation, a chest radiograph is often helpful in diagnosing pulmonary disease. In many patients, respiratory acidosis may be multifactorial. A child with bronchopulmonary dysplasia, an intrinsic lung disease, may worsen because of respiratory muscle dysfunction caused by severe hypokalemia resulting from long-term diuretic therapy. Conversely, a child with muscular dystrophy, a muscle disease, may worsen because of aspiration pneumonia. For a patient with respiratory acidosis, calculation of the gradient between the alveolar oxygen concentration and the arterial oxygen concentration, the A-a O2 gradient, is useful for distinguishing between poor respiratory effort and intrinsic lung disease. The A-a 02 gradient is increased if the hypoxemia is caused by intrinsic lung disease (see Chapter 421). Treatment Respiratory acidosis is best managed by treatment of the underly- ing etiology. In some patients, the response is very rapid, such as after the administration of naloxone to a patient with a narcotic overdose. In contrast, in the child with pneumonia, a number of days of antibiotic therapy may be required before the respiratory status improves. In many children with a chronic respiratory aci- dosis, there is no curative therapy, although an acute respiratory illness superimposed on a chronic respiratory condition is usually reversible. All patients with an acute respiratory acidosis are hypoxic and therefore need to receive supplemental oxygen. Mechanical ventila- tion is necessary in some children with respiratory acidosis. Children with significant respiratory acidosis caused by CNS disease usually Chapter 73 • Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders 523 require mechanical ventilation because such a disorder is unlikely to respond quickly to therapy. In addition, hypercarbia causes cerebral vasodilation, and the increase in ICP can be dangerous in a child with an underlying CNS disease. Readily reversible CNS depression, as from a narcotic overdose, may not require mechanical ventilation. Decisions on mechanical ventilation for other patients depend on a number of factors. Patients with severe hypercarbia (Pco2 >75 mm Hg) usually require mechanical ventilation (see Chapter 86.1). The threshold for intubation is lower if there is concomitant metabolic acidosis, a slowly responsive underlying disease, or hypoxia that responds poorly to oxygen, or if the patient appears to be tiring and respiratory arrest seems likely. In patients with a chronic respiratory acidosis, the respiratory drive is often less responsive to hypercarbia and more responsive to hypoxia. Thus, with chronic respiratory acidosis, excessive use of oxygen can blunt the respiratory drive and therefore increase the Pcoz. In these patients, oxygen must be used cautiously. When possible, it is best to avoid mechanical ventilation in a patient with chronic respiratory acidosis because extubation is often difficult. However, an acute illness may necessitate mechanical ventilation in a child with a chronic respiratory acidosis. When intubation is necessary, the Pcoz should be lowered only to the patient's normal baseline, and this should be done gradually. These patients normally have an elevated serum [HCO3 ] as a result of metabolic compensation for their respi- ratory acidosis. A rapid lowering of the Pcoz can cause a severe meta- bolic alkalosis, potentially leading to complications, including cardiac arrhythmias, decreased cardiac output, and decreased cerebral blood flow. In addition, prolonged mechanical ventilation at a normal Pcoz causes the metabolic compensation to resolve. When the patient is sub- sequently extubated, the patient will no longer benefit from metabolic compensation, causing a more severe acidemia because of the respira- tory acidosis. RESPIRATORY ALKALOSIS A respiratory alkalosis is an inappropriate reduction in the blood CO concentration. This is usually secondary to hyperventilation, initially causing removal of CO, to surpass production. Eventually, a new steady state is achieved, with removal equaling production, although at a lower CO, tension (Pcoz). A respiratory alkalosis that is not the result of hyperventilation may occur in children receiving extracorpo- real membrane oxygenation, with COz lost directly from the blood in the extracorporeal circuit. With a simple respiratory alkalosis, the pH increases, but there is a normal metabolic response that attenuates some of the change in the blood pH. A metabolic response to an acute respiratory alkalosis occurs within minutes, mediated by hydrogen ion release from nonbi- carbonate buffers. The metabolic response to an acute respiratory alka- losis is predictable: Plasma bicarbonate falls by 2 for each 10 mm Hg decrease in the Pco2 (acute compensation). A chronic respiratory alkalosis leads to more significant metabolic compensation because of the actions of the kidneys, which decrease acid secretion, producing a decrease in the serum [HCO3 ]. Both the proximal and distal tubules decrease acid secretion. Metabolic com- pensation for a respiratory alkalosis develops gradually and takes 2-3 days to produce the full effect: Plasma bicarbonate falls by 4 for each 10 mm Hg decrease in the Pcoz (chronic compensation). A chronic respiratory alkalosis is the only acid-base disturbance in which appropriate compensation may normalize the pH, although >7.4. A mixed disorder is present if the metabolic compensation is inap- propriate. A higher than expected HCO, level occurs in the setting of a concurrent metabolic alkalosis, and a lower than expected HCO3 level occurs in the setting of a concurrent metabolic acidosis. Evaluat- ing whether compensation is appropriate during a respiratory alkalosis requires clinical knowledge of the acuity of the process, because the expected compensation differs according to whether the process is acute or chronic. A low Pcoz value does not always indicate a respiratory alkalosis. The Pcoz also decreases as part of the appropriate respiratory com- pensation for a metabolic acidosis; this is not a respiratory alkalosis. 

524 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Table 73.16 Causes of Respiratory Alkalosis HYPOXEMIA OR TISSUE HYPOXIA Pneumonia Pulmonary edema Cyanotic heart disease Congestive heart failure Asthma Severe anemial High altitude Laryngospasm Aspiration Carbon monoxide poisoning Pulmonary embolism Interstitial lung disease Hypotension LUNG RECEPTOR STIMULATION Pneumonia Pulmonary edema Asthma Pulmonary embolism Hemothorax Pneumothorax Respiratory distress syndrome (adult or infant) CENTRAL STIMULATION Central nervous system disease Subarachnoid hemorrhage Encephalitis or meningitis Trauma Brain tumor Stroke Fever Pain Anxiety (panic attack) Psychogenic hyperventilation or anxiety Liver failure Sepsis Pregnancy Mechanical ventilation Hyperammonemia Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation or hemodialysis Medications Salicylate intoxication Theophylline Progesterone Exogenous catecholamines Caffeine A metabolic acidosis is the dominant acid-base disturbance in a patient with acidemia and a low Pcoz, even though there could still be a concurrent respiratory alkalosis. In contrast, a respiratory alka- losis is always present in a patient with alkalemia and a low Pcoz Even a normal Pco, value may be consistent with a respiratory alka- losis in a patient with a metabolic alkalosis, because an elevated PcO is expected as part of appropriate respiratory compensation for the Etiology and Pathophysiology A variety of stimuli can increase the ventilatory drive and cause a respi- ratory alkalosis (Table 73.16). Arterial hypoxemia or tissue hypoxia stimulates peripheral chemoreceptors to signal the central respiratory center in the medulla to increase ventilation. The resultant greater respiratory effort increases the oxygen content of the blood (Poz) but depresses the Pcoz. The effect of hypoxemia on ventilation begins when the arterial oxygen saturation (Saoz) decreases to approximately 90% (Po2 = 60 mm Hg), and hyperventilation increases as hypoxemia worsens. Acute hypoxia is a more potent stimulus for hyperventilation than chronic hypoxia; thus chronic hypoxia, as occurs in cyanotic heart disease, causes a much less severe respiratory alkalosis than an equiva- lent degree of acute hypoxia. The many causes of hypoxemia or tissue hypoxia include primary lung disease, severe anemia, and carbon mon- oxide (CO) poisoning. The lungs contain chemoreceptors and mechanoreceptors that respond to irritants and stretching and send signals to the respiratory center to increase ventilation. Aspiration or pneumonia may stimulate the chemoreceptors, whereas pulmonary edema may stimulate the mechanoreceptors. Most of the diseases that activate these receptors may also cause hypoxemia and can therefore potentially lead to hyper- ventilation by two mechanisms. Patients with primary lung disease may initially have a respiratory alkalosis, but worsening of the disease, combined with respiratory muscle fatigue, often causes respiratory fail- ure and the development of a respiratory acidosis. Hyperventilation in the absence of lung disease occurs with direct stimulation of the central respiratory center. This occurs with CNS dis- eases such as meningitis, hemorrhage, and trauma. Central hyperven- tilation caused by lesions, such as infarcts or tumors near the central respiratory center in the midbrain, increases the rate and depth of the respiratory effort. This respiratory pattern portends a poor prognosis because these midbrain lesions are frequently fatal. Systemic processes may cause centrally mediated hyperventilation. Although the exact mechanisms are not clear, liver disease causes a respiratory alkalosis that is usually proportional to the degree of liver failure. Pregnancy causes a chronic respiratory alkalosis, probably mediated by progester- one acting on the respiratory centers. Salicylates, although often caus- ing a concurrent metabolic acidosis, directly stimulate the respiratory center to produce a respiratory alkalosis. The respiratory alkalosis dur- ing sepsis is probably caused by cytokine release. Hyperventilation may be secondary to an underlying disease that causes pain, stress, or anxiety. In psychogenic hyperventilation or in panic attacks, there is no disease process accounting for the hyperven- tilation. This disorder may occur in a child who has had an emotionally stressful experience. Alternatively, it may be part of a panic disorder, especially if there are repeated episodes of hyperventilation. In such a patient, the symptoms of acute alkalemia increase anxiety, potentially perpetuating the hyperventilation. A respiratory alkalosis is quite common in children receiving mechanical ventilation because the respiratory center is not controlling ventilation. In addition, these children may have a decreased metabolic rate and thus less CO production because of sedation and paralytic medications. Normally, decreased CO, production and the resultant hypocapnia decrease ventilation, but this physiologic response cannot occur in a child who cannot reduce ventilatory effort. Clinical Manifestations The disease process causing the respiratory alkalosis is usually more concerning than the clinical manifestations. Chronic respiratory alkalosis is usually asymptomatic because metabolic compensation decreases the magnitude of the alkalemia. Acute respiratory alkalosis may cause chest tightness, palpita- tions, lightheadedness, circumoral numbness, and paresthesias of the extremities. Less common manifestations include tetany, seizures, muscle cramps, and syncope. The lightheadedness and syncope prob- ably result from the reduction in cerebral blood flow caused by hypo- capnia. The reduction in cerebral blood flow is the rationale for using hyperventilation to treat children with increased intracranial pressure (ICP). The paresthesias, tetany, and seizures may be partially related to the reduction in ionized calcium that occurs because alkalemia causes more calcium to bind to albumin. A respiratory alkalosis also causes a mild reduction in the serum potassium level. Patients with psychogenic hyperventilation tend to be symptomatic because of the respiratory alkalosis, and these symptoms, along with a sensation of breathlessness, exacerbate the hyperventilation. Diagnosis In many patients, hyperventilation producing a respiratory alkalosis is not clinically detectable, even with careful observation of the patient's 

Chapter 74 • Maintenance and Replacement Therapy 525 respiratory effort. Metabolic compensation for a respiratory alkalosis causes a low serum [HCO, ]. When hyperventilation is not appreci- ated and only serum electrolytes are evaluated, there is often a pre- sumptive diagnosis of a metabolic acidosis. If a respiratory alkalosis is suspected, only ABG determination can make the diagnosis. Hyperventilation does not always indicate a primary respiratory dis- order. In some patients, the hyperventilation is appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis. With a primary metabolic aci- dosis, acidemia is present, and the serum HCO,- level is usually quite low if there is clinically detectable hyperventilation. In contrast, the serum HCO,- level never goes below 17 mEq/L as part of the metabolic compensation for acute respiratory alkalosis, and simple acute respira- tory alkalosis causes alkalemia. The etiology of a respiratory alkalosis is often apparent from the physical examination or history, and it may consist of lung disease, neurologic disease, or cyanotic heart disease. Hypoxemia is a common cause of hyperventilation, and it is important to diagnose because it suggests a significant underlying disease that requires expeditious treat- ment. Hypoxemia may be detected on physical examination (cyanosis) or by pulse oximetry. However, normal pulse oximetry values do not eliminate hypoxemia as the etiology of the hyperventilation. There are two reasons why pulse oximetry is not adequate for eliminating hypox- emia as a cause of a respiratory alkalosis. First, pulse oximetry is not very sensitive at detecting a mildly low arterial Poz (Paoz). Second, the hyperventilation during a respiratory alkalosis causes Pao, to increase, possibly to a level that is not identified as abnormal by pulse oximetry. Only ABG measurement can eliminate hypoxia as an explanation for a respiratory alkalosis. Along with hypoxemia, it is important to con- sider processes that cause tissue hypoxia without necessarily causing hypoxemia. Examples are CO or cyanide poisoning, severe anemia, and heart failure. Lung disease without hypoxemia may cause hyperventilation. Although lung disease is often apparent by history or physical exami- nation, a chest radiograph may detect more subtle disease. The patient with a pulmonary embolism may have benign chest radiograph find- ings, normal Paoz, and isolated respiratory alkalosis, although hypoxia may eventually occur. Diagnosis of a pulmonary embolism requires a high index of suspicion and should be considered in children without another explanation for respiratory alkalosis, especially if risk factors are present, such as prolonged bed rest and a hypercoagulable state (e.g., nephrotic syndrome, lupus anticoagulant). Treatment There is seldom a need for specific treatment of respiratory alkalosis. Rather, treatment focuses on the underlying disease. Mechanical ven- of increased ICP). For the patient with hyperventilation secondary to anxiety, efforts should be undertaken to reassure the child, usually enlisting the par- ents. Along with reassurance, patients with psychogenic hyperventila- tion may benefit from benzodiazepines. During an acute episode of psychogenic hyperventilation, rebreathing into a paper bag increases the patient's PcO2. Using a paper bag instead of a plastic bag allows adequate oxygenation but permits [CO,] in the bag to increase. The resultant increase in the patients Pcoz decreases the symptoms of the respiratory alkalosis that tend to perpetuate the hyperventilation. Rebreathing should be performed only when other causes of hyperven- tilation have been eliminated; pulse oximetry during the rebreathing is prudent. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 74 Maintenance and Replacement Therapy Larry A. Greenbaum Maintenance intravenous (IV) fluids are used in a child who cannot be fed enterally. Along with maintenance fluids, children may require concur- rent replacement fluids if they have continued excessive losses, as may occur with drainage from a nasogastric (NG) tube or with high urine out- put because of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. If dehydration is present, the patient also needs to receive deficit replacement (see Chapter 75). A child awaiting surgery may need only maintenance fluids, whereas a child with diarrheal dehydration needs maintenance and deficit therapy and also may require replacement fluids if significant diarrhea continues. MAINTENANCE THERAPY Children normally have large variations in their daily intake of water and electrolytes. The only exceptions are patients who receive fixed dietary reg- imens orally, via a gastric tube, or as IV total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Healthy children can tolerate significant variations in intake because of the many homeostatic mechanisms that can adjust absorption and excretion of water and electrolytes (see Chapter 73). The calculated water and elec- trolyte need that form the basis of maintenance therapy are not absolute requirements. Rather, these calculations provide reasonable guidelines for a starting point to estimate IV therapy. Children do not need to be started on IV fluids simply because their intake is being monitored in a hospital and they are not taking "maintenance fluids" orally, unless there is a patho- logic process present that necessitates high fluid intake. Maintenance fluids are most often necessary in preoperative and postoperative surgical patients; many nonsurgical patients also require maintenance fluids. It is important to recognize when it is necessary to begin maintenance fluids. A normal teenager who is given nothing by mouth (NPO) overnight for a morning procedure does not require maintenance fluids because a healthy adolescent can easily tolerate 12- 18 hours without oral intake. In contrast, a 6-month-old child waiting for surgery should begin receiving IV fluids within 8 hours of the last feeding. Infants become dehydrated more quickly than older patients. A child with obligatory high urine output from nephrogenic diabetes insip- idus should begin receiving IV fluids soon after being classified as NPO. Maintenance fluids are composed of a solution of water, glucose, sodium (Na*), and potassium (K+). This solution has the advantages of simplicity, long shelf life, low cost, and compatibility with peripheral IV administration. Such a solution accomplishes the major objectives of maintenance fluids (Table 74.1). Patients lose water, Nat, and K+ in their urine and stool; water is also lost from the skin and lungs. Maintenance fluids replace these losses, thereby avoiding the development of dehydration and Na+ or K+ deficiency. Table 74.1 Goals of Maintenance Fluids • Prevent dehydration • Prevent electrolyte disorders • Prevent ketoacidosis • Prevent protein degradation 

526 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders the normal caloric needs of the patient, prevents the development of starvation ketoacidosis, and diminishes the protein degradation that would occur if the patient received no calories. Maintenance fluids do not provide adequate calories, protein, fat, minerals, or vitamins. This fact is typically not problematic for a patient receiving IV fluids for a few days. A patient receiving maintenance IV fluids is receiving inad- equate calories and will lose 0.5-1% of weight each day. It is impera- tive that patients not remain on maintenance therapy indefinitely; TPN should be used for children who cannot be fed enterally for more than a few days, especially patients with underlying malnutrition. Prototypical maintenance fluid therapy does not provide elec- trolytes such as calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and bicarbon- ate. For most patients, this lack is not problematic for a few days, although there are patients who will not tolerate this omission, usu- ally because of excessive losses. A child with proximal renal tubu- lar acidosis wastes bicarbonate in urine. Such a patient will rapidly become acidemic unless bicarbonate (or another base) is added to the maintenance fluids. It is important to remember the limitations of maintenance fluid therapy. MAINTENANCE WATER Water is a crucial component of maintenance fluid therapy because of the obligatory daily water losses. These losses are both measurable (urine, stool) and not measurable (insensible losses from the skin and lungs). Failure to replace these losses leads to a child who is thirsty, uncomfortable, and ultimately dehydrated. The goal of maintenance water is to provide enough water to replace these losses. Although urinary losses are approximately 60% of the total, the normal kidney can greatly modify water losses, with daily urine volume potentially varying by more than a factor of 20. Maintenance water is designed to provide enough water so that the kidney does not need to significantly dilute or concentrate the urine. It also provides a margin of safety so that normal homeostatic mecha- nisms can adjust urinary water losses to prevent overhydration and dehydration. This adaptability obviates the need for absolute preci- sion in determining water requirements. This fact is important, given the absence of absolute accuracy in the formulas for calculation of water needs. Table 74.2 provides a system for calculating maintenance water on the basis of the patient's weight and emphasizes the high water needs of smaller, less mature patients. This approach is reliable, although calculations based on weight do overestimate the water needs of an overweight child, in whom it is better to base the cal- culations on the lean body weight, which can be estimated by using the 50th percentile of body weight for the child's height. It is also important to remember that there is an upper limit of 2.4 L/24 hr Table 74.2 Body Weight Method for Calculating Daily Maintenance Fluid Volume BODY WEIGHT 0-10 kg 11-20 kg >20 kg FLUID PER DAY 100 mL/kg 1,000 mL + 50 mL/kg for each kg > 10kg 1,500 mL + 20mL/kg for each kg >20 kg* *The maximum total fluid per day is normally 2,400 mL. Table 74.3 Hourly Maintenance Water Rate For body weight 0-10 kg: 4mL/kg/hr For body weight 10-20 kg: 40 mL/hr + 2 mL/kg/hr x (wt - 10kg) For body weight >20 kg: 60 mL/hr + 1 mL/kg/hr x (wt - 20 kg)* *The maximum fluid rate is normally 100 mL/hr. in adult-sized patients. IV fluids are written as an hourly rate. The formulas in Table 74.3 enable rapid calculation of the rate of main- tenance fluids. INTRAVENOUS SOLUTIONS The components of available solutions are shown in Table 74.4. These solutions are available with 5% dextrose (D5), 10% dextrose (D10), or without dextrose. Except for Ringer lactate (lactated Ringer, LR), they are also available with added potassium (10 or 20 mEq/L). A balanced IV fluid contains a base (lactate or acetate), a more physiologic chloride concentration than normal saline (NS), and additional physiologic con- centrations of electrolytes such as potassium, calcium, and magnesium. Examples include LR and Plasma-Lyte, and there is evidence suggest- ing benefit versus NS in some but not all clinical situations. A hospi- tal pharmacy can also prepare custom-made solutions with different concentrations of sodium or potassium. In addition, other electrolytes, such as calcium, magnesium, phosphate, acetate, and bicarbonate, can be added to IV solutions. Custom-made solutions take time to prepare and are much more expensive than commercial solutions. The use of custom-made solutions is necessary only for patients who have under- lying disorders that cause significant electrolyte imbalances. The use of commercial solutions saves time and expense. A normal plasma osmolality is 285-295 mOsm/kg. Infusing an IV solution peripherally with a much lower osmolality can cause water to move into red blood cells, leading to hemolysis. Thus IV fluids are gen- erally designed to have an osmolality that is either close to 285 or greater (fluids with moderately higher osmolality do not cause problems). Thus 0.2NS (osmolality = 68) should not be administered peripherally, but D5 0.2NS (osmolality = 346) or D5 1/2NS + 20 mEq/L potassium chloride (KCI) with an osmolality of 472 can be administered. Hypotonic fluids seem more physiologic given the low Nat content of breast milk and formula (~7 mEq/L). However, hospitalized chil- dren often have impaired water excretion because of volume depletion or nonosmotic stimuli for antidiuretic hormone (ADH) production, such as respiratory disease, central nervous system disease, stress, pain, nausea, and medications (e.g., narcotics). Hypotonic fluids increase the risk of hyponatremia, which may have serious sequelae; hence, isotonic fluids with D5 are recommended as standard maintenance fluid except in neonates <28 days of age. GLUCOSE Maintenance fluids usually contain D5, which provides 17 calories/100 mL and nearly 20% of the daily caloric needs. This level is enough to prevent ketone production and helps minimize protein degradation, but the child will lose weight on this regimen. Maintenance fluids are also lacking in such crucial nutrients as protein, fat, vitamins, and min- erals. Hence, a patient needs to be started on TPN after a few days of maintenance fluids if enteral feedings are still not possible. SELECTION OF MAINTENANCE FLUIDS An isotonic fluid (NS, LR, Plasma-Lyte) with D5 and KCI (10-20 mEq/L is usually added to NS) is recommended for maintenance IV fluids. Surgical patients typically receive isotonic fluids (NS, LR) dur- ing surgery and in the recovery room for 6-8 hours postoperatively; the rate is typically approximately two thirds the calculated maintenance rate, with dextrose added if clinically indicated. Subsequent mainte- nance fluids have the addition of D5 and 10-20 mEq/L KCl based on the serum K+ and the clinical setting. Electrolytes should be measured at least daily in all children receiving >50% of maintenance fluids intra- venously unless the child is receiving prolonged IV fluids (TPN). These guidelines assume that no disease process is present that would require an adjustment in either the volume or the electrolyte composition of maintenance fluids. Neonates, and especially prema- ture infants, are outside the scope of these guidelines given their unique physiology. Children with renal insufficiency may be hyperkalemic or unable to excrete K* and may not tolerate 10 or 20 mEq/L of potassium. Patients with persistent ADH production because of an underlying disease process (syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion, conges- tive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, liver disease) should receive less 

Chapter 74 • Maintenance and Replacement Therapy 527 Table 74.4 Composition of Intravenous Solutions* FLUID Normal saline [NA*] 154 (0.9% NaCI) Half-normal saline 77 (0.45% NaCl) 0.2 normal saline 34 (0.2% NaCI) Ringer lactate 130 *Electrolyte concentrations in mEq/L. [CL-] 154 77 34 109 than maintenance fluids. Children with meningitis are fluid restricted unless intravascular volume depletion is present (see Chapter 643.1). Treatment is individualized, and careful monitoring is critical. In children with complicated pathophysiologic derangements, it may be necessary to adjust empirically the electrolyte composition and rate of maintenance fluids on the basis of electrolyte measure- ments and assessment of fluid balance. In all children it is critical to monitor weight, urine output, and electrolytes carefully to identify overhydration or underhydration, hyponatremia, and other electrolyte disturbances, and then adjust the rate or composition of the IV solu- tion accordingly. VARIATIONS IN MAINTENANCE WATER AND ELECTROLYTES The calculation of maintenance water is based on standard assumptions regarding water losses. In some patients, however, these assumptions are incorrect. To identify such situations, it is helpful to understand the source and magnitude of normal water losses. Table 74.5 lists the three sources of normal water loss. Urine is the most important contributor to normal water loss. Insen- sible losses represent approximately one third of total maintenance water (40% in infants; 25% in adolescents and adults). Insensible losses are composed of evaporative losses from the skin and lungs that can- not be quantitated. The evaporative losses from the skin do not include sweat, which would be considered an additional (sensible) source of water loss. Stool normally represents a minor source of water loss. Maintenance water and electrolyte needs may be increased or decreased, depending on the clinical situation. This may be obvious, as in the infant with profuse diarrhea, or subtle, as in the patient who has decreased insensible losses while receiving mechanical ventilation. It is helpful to consider the sources of normal water and electrolyte losses and to determine whether any of these sources is being modified in a specific patient. It is then necessary to adjust maintenance water and electrolyte calculations. Table 74.6 lists a variety of clinical situations that modify normal water and electrolyte losses. The skin can be a source of very significant water loss, particularly in neonates, especially premature infants, who are under radiant warmers or are receiving phototherapy. Very low birthweight infants can have insensible losses of 100-200 mL/kg/24 hr. Burns can result in massive losses of water and electrolytes, and there are specific guidelines for fluid management in children with burns (see Chapter 89). Sweat losses of water and electrolytes, especially in a warm climate, can also be significant. Children with cystic fibrosis and some children with pseudohypoaldosteronism have increased sodium losses from the skin. Fever increases evaporative losses from the skin. These losses are somewhat predictable, leading to a 10-15% increase in maintenance water needs for each 1°C (1.8°F) increase in temperature above 38°C (100.4°F). These guidelines are for a patient with a persistent fever; a 1-hour fever spike does not cause an appreciable increase in water needs. Tachypnea or a tracheostomy increases evaporative losses from the lungs. A humidified system (nasal cannula, mask, ventilator) causes a decrease in insensible losses from the lungs and can even lead to water absorption via the lungs; a ventilated patient has a decrease in [CA2+] 4 3 [LACTATE-] - - - 28 Table 74.5 Sources of Water Loss • Urine: 60% • Insensible losses: =35% (skin and lungs) • Stool: 5% maintenance water requirements. It may be difficult to quantify the changes that take place in the individual patient in these situations. REPLACEMENT FLUIDS The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is potentially a source of considerable water loss. Gl water losses are accompanied by electrolytes and thus may cause disturbances in intravascular volume and electrolyte con- centrations. GI losses are often associated with loss of potassium, lead- ing to hypokalemia. Because of the high bicarbonate concentration in stool, children with diarrhea usually have a metabolic acidosis, which may be accentuated if volume depletion causes hypoperfusion and a concurrent lactic acidosis. Emesis or losses from an NG tube can cause a metabolic alkalosis (see Chapter 73). In the absence of vomiting, diarrhea, or NG drainage, GI losses of water and electrolytes are usually quite small. All GI losses are consid- ered excessive, and the increase in the water requirement is equal to the volume of fluid losses. Because GI water and electrolyte losses can be precisely measured, an appropriate replacement solution can be used It is impossible to predict the losses for the next 24 hours; it is better to replace excessive GI losses as they occur. The child should receive an appropriate maintenance fluid that does not consider the GI losses. The losses should then be replaced after they occur, with use of a solution with a similar electrolyte concentration as the GI fluid. The losses are usually replaced every 1-6 hours, depending on the rate of loss, with very rapid losses being replaced more frequently. dehydration and electrolyte disorders. In the unusual patient with signifi- cant diarrhea and a limited ability to take oral fluid, it is important to have a plan for replacing excessive stool losses. The volume of stool should be measured, and an equal volume of replacement solution should be given. Data are available on the average electrolyte composition of diarrhea in children (see Table 74.7). With this information, an appropriate replace- ment solution can be designed. The solution shown in Table 74.7 replaces stool losses of Nat, K+, chloride (CI), and bicarbonate. Each 1 mL of stool should be replaced by 1 mL of this solution. The average electrolyte composition of diarrhea is just an average, and there may be considerable variation. It is therefore advisable to consider measuring the electrolyte composition of a patient's diarrhea if the amount is especially excessive or if the patients serum electrolyte levels are problematic. Loss of gastric fluid, through emesis or NG suction, is also likely to cause dehydration, in that most patients with either condition have impaired oral intake of fluids. Electrolyte disturbances, particularly hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis, are also common. These compli- cations can be avoided by judicious use of a replacement solution. The composition of gastric fluid shown in Table 74.8 is the basis for design- ing a replacement solution. 

528 Part Vl • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Table 74.6 Adjustments in Maintenance Water SOURCE Skin Lungs Gastrointestinal tract Renal Miscellaneous CAUSES OF INCREASED WATER NEEDS Radiant warmer Phototherapy Fever Sweat Burns Tachypnea Tracheostomy Diarrhea Emesis Nasogastric suction Polyuria Surgical drain Third spacing CAUSES OF DECREASED WATER NEEDS Incubator (premature infant) Humidified system (nasal cannula, mask, ventilator) - Oliguria/anuria Table 74.7 Replacement Fluid for Diarrhea AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF DIARRHEA Sodium: 55 mEq/L Potassium: 25 mEq/L Bicarbonate: 15 mEq/L APPROACH TO REPLACEMENT OF ONGOING LOSSES Solution: D5 1/2NS + 30 mEg/L sodium bicarbonate + 20 mEg/L KCI Replace stool mL/mL every 1-6 hr D5, 5% dextrose; NS, normal saline. Table 74.8 Replacement Fluid for Emesis or Nasogastric Losses AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF GASTRIC FLUID Sodium: 60 mEq/L Potassium: 10 mEq/L Chloride: 90 mEq/L APPROACH TO REPLACEMENT OF ONGOING LOSSES Solution: normal saline + 10 mEq/L KCI Replace output mL/mL every 1-6 hr Patients with gastric losses frequently have hypokalemia, although the K+ concentration of gastric fluid is relatively low. The associated urinary K+ loss is an important cause of hypokalemia in this situation (see Chapter 73). These patients may need additional potassium either urinary K* losses. Urine output is normally the largest cause of water loss. Diseases such as renal failure and syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion can lead to a decrease in urine volume. The patient with oliguria or anuria has a decreased need for water and electrolytes; continuation of main- tenance fluids produces fluid overload. In contrast, postobstructive diuresis, the polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis, diabetes mellitus, and diabetes insipidus increase urine production. To prevent dehydra- tion, the patient must receive more than standard maintenance fluids Table 74.9 Adjusting Fluid Therapy for Altered Renal Output OLIGURIA/ANURIA Replazment of insensible fluid losses (25-40% of maintenance) with Replace urine output mL/mL with D5 1/2NS ÷ KCI POLYURIA Rep 1/S to insensible fluid losses (25 40% of maintenance) with Measure urine electrolytes Replace urine output mL/mL with solution based on measured urine electrolytes D5, 5% dextrose; NS, normal saline. when urine output is excessive. The electrolyte losses in patients with polyuria are variable. In diabetes insipidus, the urine electrolyte con- centration is usually low, whereas children with diseases such as juve- nile nephronophthisis and obstructive uropathy usually have increased losses of both water and sodium. The approach to decreased or increased urine output is similar (Table 74.9). The patient receives fluids at a rate to replace insensible losses. This is accomplished by a rate of fluid administration that is 25-40% of the normal maintenance rate, depending on the patient's age. Replacing insensible losses in the anuric child will theoretically maintain an even fluid balance, with the caveat that 25-40% of the nor- mal maintenance rate is only an estimate of insensible losses. In the individual patient, this rate is adjusted on the basis of monitoring of the patient's weight and volume status. Most children with renal insuffi- ciency receive little or no potassium because the kidney is the principal For the oliguric child, it is important to add a urine replacement solution to prevent dehydration. This issue is especially important in the patient with acute kidney injury, in whom output may increase, potentially leading to volume depletion and worsening of kidney injury if the patient remains on only insensible fluids. A replacement solution of D5 1/2NS is usually appropriate initially, although its composition may have to be adjusted if urine output increases significantly. Most children with polyuria (except in diabetes mellitus; see Chap- ter 629) should be started on replacement of insensible fluid plus urine losses. This approach avoids the need to attempt to calculate the vol- ume of urine output that is "normal" so that the patient can be given 

replacement fluid for the excess. In these patients, urine output is, by definition, excessive, and it is often helpful to measure Na* and K+ con- centrations of the urine to help in formulating the urine replacement solution. Surgical drains and chest tubes can produce measurable fluid out- put. These fluid losses should be replaced when they are significant. They can be measured and replaced with an appropriate solution. Third space losses, which manifest as edema and ascites, are caused by a shift of fluid from the intravascular space into the interstitial space. Although these losses cannot be quantitated easily, third space losses can be large and may lead to intravascular volume depletion, despite the patient's weight gain. Replacement of third space fluid is empirical but should be anticipated in patients who are at risk, such as children who have burns or abdominal surgery. Third space losses and chest tube output are isotonic, so they usually require replacement with an isotonic fluid, such as NS or LR. Adjustments in the amount of replace- ment fluid for third space losses are based on continuing assessment of the patients intravascular volume status. Protein losses from chest tube drainage can be signitcant, occasionally necessitating that 5% albumin be used as a replacement solution. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 75 Deficit Therapy Larry A. Greenbaum Dehydration, most often caused by gastroenteritis, is a common prob- lem in children. Most cases can be managed with oral rehydration (see Chapter 387). Even children with mild to moderate hyponatremic or hypernatremic dehydration can be managed with oral rehydration. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS The first step in caring for the child with dehydration is to assess the degree of dehydration (Table 75.1), which dictates both the urgency of the situation and the volume of fluid needed for rehydration. The infant with mild dehydration (3-5% of body weight dehydrated) has few clin- ical signs or symptoms. The infant may be thirsty; the alert parent may notice a decline in urine output. The history is most helpful. The infant with moderate dehydration has clear physical signs and symptoms. Intravascular volume depletion is evident from an increased heart rate and reduced urine output. This patient needs fairly prompt interven- tion. The infant with severe dehydration is gravely ill. The decrease in blood pressure indicates that vital organs may be receiving inadequate Table 75.1 Clinical Evaluation of Dehydration Mild dehydration (<5% in an infant; <3% in an older child or adult): Normal or increased pulse; decreased urine output; thirsty; normal physical findings Moderate dehydration (5-10% in an infant; 3-6% in an older child or adult): Tachycardia; little or no urine output; irritable/lethargic; sunken eyes and fontanel; decreased tears; dry mucous membranes; mild delay in elasticity (skin turgor); delayed capillary refill (>1.5 sec); cool and pale Severe dehydration (>10% in an infant; >6% in an older child or adult): Peripheral pulses either rapid and weak or absent; decreased blood pressure; no urine output; very sunken eyes and fontanel; no tears; parched mucous membranes; delayed elasticity (poor skin turgor); very delayed capillary refill (>3 sec); cold and mottled; limp, Chapter 75 • Deficit Therapy 529 perfusion. Immediate and aggressive intervention is necessary. If pos- sible, the child with severe dehydration should initially receive intra- venous (IV) therapy. For older children and adults, mild, moderate, or severe dehydration represents a lower percentage of body weight lost. This difference occurs because water accounts for a higher percentage of body weight in infants (see Chapter 73). Clinical assessment of dehydration is only an estimate; thus the patient must be continually reevaluated during therapy. The degree of dehydration is underestimated in hypernatremic dehydration because the movement of water from the intracellular space (ICS) to the extra- cellular space (ECS) helps preserve the intravascular volume. The history usually suggests the etiology of the dehydration and may predict whether the patient will have a normal sodium concentration (isotonic dehydration), hyponatremic dehydration, or hypernatremic dehydration. The neonate with dehydration caused by poor intake of breast milk often has hypernatremic dehydration. Hypernatremic dehydration is likely in any child with losses of hypotonic fluid and poor water intake, as may occur with diarrhea, and poor oral intake because of anorexia or emesis. Hyponatremic dehydration occurs in the child with diarrhea who is taking in large quantities of low-salt fluid, such as water or formula. Some children with dehydration are appropriately thirsty, but in oth- ers the lack of intake is part of the pathophysiology of the dehydration. Even though decreased urine output is present in most children with dehydration, good urine output may be deceptively present if a child has an underlying renal defect, such as diabetes insipidus or a salt- wasting nephropathy, or in infants with hypernatremic dehydration. Physical examination findings are usually proportional to the degree of dehydration. Parents may be helpful in assessment of the child for the presence of sunken eyes, because this finding may be subtle. Pinching and gently twisting the skin of the abdominal or thoracic wall detects tenting of the skin (turgor, elasticity). Tented skin remains in a pinched position rather than springing quickly back to normal. It is difficult to properly assess tenting of the skin in premature infants or severely malnourished children. Activation of the sympathetic nervous system causes tachycardia in children with intravascular volume depletion; diaphoresis may also be present. Postural changes in blood pressure are often helpful for evaluating and assessing the response to therapy in children with dehydration. Tachypnea in children with dehydration may be present secondary to a metabolic acidosis from stool losses of bicarbonate or lactic acidosis from shock (see Chapter 85). LABORATORY FINDINGS Several laboratory findings are useful for evaluating the child with dehy- dration. The serum sodium concentration determines the type of dehy- dration. Metabolic acidosis may be a result of stool bicarbonate losses in children with diarrhea, secondary acute kidney injury (see Chapter 572.1), or lactic acidosis from shock. The anion gap is useful for differ- entiating among the various causes of a metabolic acidosis (see Chapter 73). Emesis or nasogastric losses usually cause a metabolic alkalosis. The serum potassium (K*) concentration may be low as a result of diarrheal losses. In children with dehydration as a result of emesis, gastric K* losses, metabolic alkalosis, and urinary K* losses all contribute to hypokalemia. Metabolic acidosis, which causes a shift of K* out of cells, and acute kidney injury may lead to hyperkalemia. A combination of mechanisms may be present; thus it may be difficult to predict the child's acid-base status or serum K+ level from the history alone. The blood urea nitrogen (BUN) value and serum creatinine con- centration are useful in assessing the child with dehydration. Volume depletion without parenchymal kidney injury may cause a dispropor- tionate increase in the BUN with little or no change in the creatinine concentration. This condition is secondary to increased passive resorp- tion of urea in the proximal tubule as a result of appropriate renal con- servation of sodium and water. The increase in the BUN with moderate or severe dehydration may be absent or blunted in the child with poor protein intake, because urea production depends on protein degrada- tion. The BUN may be disproportionately increased in the child with increased urea production, as occurs with a gastrointestinal bleed or 

530 Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders with the use of glucocorticoids, which increase catabolism. A signifi- cant elevation of the creatinine concentration suggests acute kidney injury, although a small, transient increase can occur with dehydration. Decreased kidney perfusion is the most common etiology of acute kid- ney injury in a child with volume depletion, but occasionally the child may have previously undetected chronic kidney disease or an alterna- tive explanation for the acute kidney injury. Renal vein thrombosis is a well-described sequela of severe dehydration in infants; findings may include thrombocytopenia and hematuria (see Chapter 562.2). Hemoconcentration from dehydration causes increases in hema- tocrit, hemoglobin, and serum proteins. These values normalize with rehydration. A normal hemoglobin concentration during acute dehy- dration may mask an underlying anemia. A decreased albumin level in a dehydrated patient suggests a chronic disease, such as malnutrition, nephrotic syndrome, or liver disease, or an acute process, such as cap- illary leak. An acute or chronic protein-losing enteropathy may also cause a low serum albumin concentration. CALCULATION OF THE FLUID DEFICIT Determining the fluid deficit necessitates clinical determination of the percentage of dehydration and multiplication of this percentage by the patient's weight; a child who weighs 10 kg and is 10% dehydrated has a fluid deficit of 1 L. APPROACH TO SEVERE DEHYDRATION The child with dehydration needs acute intervention to ensure that there is adequate tissue perfusion. This resuscitation phase requires rapid restora- tion of the circulating intravascular volume and treatment of shock with an isotonic solution, such as normal saline (NS), Ringer lactate (lactated Ringer solution, LR), or Plasma-Lyte (see Chapter 85). The child is given a fluid bolus, usually 20 mL/kg of the isotonic fluid, over approximately 20 minutes. The child with severe dehydration may require multiple fluid boluses and may need to receive the boluses as fast as possible. In a child with a known or probable metabolic alkalosis (e.g., child with isolated vom- iting), LR or Plasma-Lyte should not be used because the lactate or acetate would worsen the alkalosis. However, LR or Plasma-Lyte may be prefer- able to NS in shock since it is a balanced solution (see Chapters 74 and 85); NS may cause a hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Colloids, such as blood, 5% albumin, and plasma, are rarely needed for fluid boluses. A crystalloid solution (NS or LR) is satis- factory, with both lower risk of infection and lower cost. Blood is obviously indicated in the child with significant anemia or acute blood loss. Plasma is useful for children with a coagulopathy. The child with hypoalbuminemia may benefit from 5% albumin, although there is evidence that albumin infusions increase mortal- ity in adults. The volume and the infusion rate for colloids are gen- erally modified compared with crystalloids (see Chapter 522). The initial resuscitation and rehydration phase is complete when the child has an adequate intravascular volume. Typically, the child shows clinical improvement, including a lower heart rate, normalization of blood pressure, improved perfusion, better urine output, and a more alert affect. With adequate intravascular volume, it is appropriate to plan the fluid therapy for the next 24 hours. A general approach is out- lined in Table 75.2, with the caveat that there are many different approaches to correcting dehydration. A balanced solution can be substituted for NS. In isonatremic or hyponatremic dehydration, the entire fluid deficit is corrected over 24 hours; a slower approach is used for hypernatremic dehydration (discussed later). The volume of isotonic fluids that the patient has received is subtracted from this total. The remaining fluid volume is then administered over 24 hours. The potassium concentration may need to be decreased or, less frequently, increased, depending on the clinical situation. Potassium is not usually included in the IV fluids until the patient voids and normal renal function is documented by measurement of BUN and creatinine. Children with significant ongoing losses need to receive an appropriate replacement solution (see Chapter 74). MONITORING AND ADJUSTING THERAPY The formulation of a plan for correcting a child's dehydration is only the beginning of management. All calculations in fluid therapy are only approximations. This statement is especially true for the assessment of percentage dehydration. It is equally important to monitor the patient during treatment and to modify therapy on the basis of the clinical situation. Table 75.3 lists the cornerstones of patient monitoring. The patient's vital signs are useful indicators of intravascular volume status. The child with decreased blood pres- sure and an increased heart rate will probably benefit from a fluid The patient's intake and output are critically important in the dehydrated child. The child who, after 8 hours of therapy, has more output than input because of continuing diarrhea needs to be started on a replacement solution. See the guidelines in Chapter 74 for selecting an appropriate replacement solution. Urine output is useful for evaluating the success of therapy. Good urine output indicates that rehydration has been successful. Signs of dehydration on physical examination suggest the need for continued rehydration. Signs of fluid overload, such as edema and pulmonary congestion, are present in the child who is over- hydrated. An accurate daily weight measurement is critical for the management of the dehydrated child. There should be a gain in weight during successful therapy. Measurement of serum electrolyte levels at least daily is appro- priate for any child who is receiving IV rehydration. Such a child is at risk for sodium, potassium, and acid-base disorders. It is always important to look at trends. For example, a sodium concentration ([Na+]) of 144 mEq/L is normal; but if the [Na*] was 136 mEq/L 12 hours earlier, there is a distinct risk that the child will be hyperna- tremic in 12 or 24 hours. It is advisable to be proactive in adjusting fluid therapy. IV fluids is not rigidly prescribed. Rather, the patient's serum K+ level The underlying kidney unction are used to madiy lassin delivery. does not receive any potassium until the serum K+ level decreases. Table 75.2 Fluid Management of Dehydration 1. Restore intravascular volume Isotonic fluid (NS or LR): 20 mL/kg over 20 min Repeat as needed 2. Calculate 24 hr fluid needs: maintenance + deficit volume 3. Subtract isotonic fluid already administered from 24 hr fluid needs 4. Administer remaining volume over 24 hr using 5% dextrose NS + 20 mEq/L KCI 5. Replace ongoing losses as they occur LR, Ringer lactate; NS, normal saline. Table 75.3 Monitoring Therapy Vital signs Pulse Blood pressure Intake and output Fluid balance Urine output Physical examination Weight Clinical signs of depletion or overload Electrolytes 

Conversely, the patient with a K+ level of 2.5 mEq/L may require addi- tional potassium. Metabolic acidosis can be quite severe in dehydrated children. Although normal kidneys eventually correct this problem, a child with renal dysfunction may be unable to correct a metabolic acido- sis, and a portion of the patient's IV sodium chloride may have to be replaced with sodium bicarbonate, sodium lactate (as in LR), or sodium acetate. The serum K* level is modified by the patient's acid-base status. Acidosis increases serum K+ by causing intracellular K+ to move into appropriately. HYPONATREMIC DEHYDRATION The pathogenesis of hyponatremic dehydration usually involves a combination of sodium and water loss and water retention to compensate for the volume depletion. The patient has a pathologic increase in fluid loss, and the lost fluid contains sodium. Most fluid that is lost has a lower sodium concentration, so patients with only fluid loss would have hypernatremia. Diarrhea has, on average, a sodium concentration of 50 mEq/L. Replacing diarrheal fluid with water, which has almost no sodium, causes a reduction in the serum [Na*] (see Chapter 74). The volume depletion stimulates synthesis of antidiuretic hormone, resulting in reduced renal water excretion. Therefore the body's usual mechanism for preventing hyponatre- mia, renal water excretion, is blocked. The risk of hyponatremia is further increased if the volume depletion is a result of loss of fluid with a higher sodium concentration, as may occur with renal salt wasting, third space losses, or diarrhea with high sodium content (cholera). The initial goal in treating hyponatremia is correction of intra- vascular volume depletion with isotonic fluid. An overly rapid (>8- 10 mEq/L over the first 24 hours) or overcorrection in the serum [Na*] (>135 mEq/L) is associated with an increased risk of osmotic demyelination syndrome (formerly central pontine myelinolysis) (see Chapter 73). Most patients with hyponatremic dehydration do well with the same basic strategy outlined in Table 75.2. Again, K+ delivery is adjusted according to the initial serum K+ level and the patient's renal function. Potassium is not given until the patient The patients [Na*] is monitored closely to ensure appropriate correc- tion, and the sodium concentration of the fluid is adjusted accordingly. Patients with ongoing losses require an appropriate replacement solu- tion (see Chapter 74). Patients with neurologic symptoms (seizures) as a result of hyponatremia need to receive an acute infusion of hyper- tonic (3%) saline to increase the serum [Na*] rapidly (see Chapter 73). HYPERNATREMIC DEHYDRATION Hypernatremic dehydration is the most dangerous form of dehy- dration because of complications of hypernatremia itself and of its therapy. Hypernatremia can cause serious neurologic damage, including central nervous system hemorrhages and thrombosis. This damage appears to be secondary to the movement of water from the brain cells into the hypertonic extracellular fluid (ECF), causing brain cell shrinkage and tearing blood vessels within the brain (see Chapter 73). tremic dehydration partially protects the intravascular volume. Unfor- tunately, because the initial manifestations are milder, children with hypernatremic dehydration are often brought for medical attention with more profound dehydration. Children with hypernatremic dehydration are often lethargic, and they may be irritable when touched. Hypernatremia may cause fever, hypertonicity, and hyperreflexia. More severe neurologic symptoms may develop if cerebral bleeding or thrombosis occurs. Chapter 75 • Deficit Therapy 531 Overly rapid treatment of hypernatremic dehydration may cause significant morbidity and mortality. Idiogenic osmoles are gener- ated within the brain during the development of hypernatremia; they increase the osmolality within the cells of the brain, providing protection against brain cell shrinkage caused by movement of water out of the cells and into the hypertonic ECF. Idiogenic osmoles dis- sipate slowly during the correction of hypernatremia. With overly rapid lowering of the extracellular osmolality during the correction of hypernatremia, an osmotic gradient may be created that causes water movement from the ECS into the cells of the brain, produc- ing cerebral edema. Symptoms of the resultant cerebral edema can range from seizures to brain herniation and death. To minimize the risk of cerebral edema during the correction of hypernatremic dehydration, the serum sodium concentration should not decrease by >10 mEq/L every 24 hours. The deficits in severe hypernatremic dehydration may need to be corrected over 2-4 days (Fig. 75.1). The initial resuscitation of hypernatremic dehydration requires restoration of the intravascular volume with NS. LR should not be used because it is more hypotonic than NS and may cause too rapid a decrease in the serum [Na*], especially if multiple fluid boluses are To avoid cerebral edema during correction of hypernatremic dehydration, the fluid deficit is corrected slowly. The rate of cor- rection depends on the initial sodium concentration (see Fig. 75.1). There is no general agreement on the choice or the rate of fluid administration for correcting hypernatremic dehydration; these factors are not nearly as important as vigilant monitoring of the serum [Nat] and adjustment of the therapy according to the result. The rate of decrease of the serum [Nat] is roughly related to the "free water" delivery, although there is considerable variation between patients. Free water is water without sodium. NS contains no free water, half-normal saline (½ NS) is 50% free water, and water is 100% free water. Smaller patients, to achieve the same decrease in the sodium concentration, tend to need higher amounts of free water delivery per kilogram because of higher insensible fluid losses. Five percent dextrose (D5) with ½ NS is usually an appropri- ate starting solution for correction of a patient with hypernatremic dehydration. Some patients, especially infants with ongoing high insensible water losses, may rarely need to receive D5 0.2NS, which should be used with great caution and constant monitoring. Others require D5 NS. A child with dehydration as a result of pure free water loss, as usually occurs with diabetes insipidus, usually needs a more hypotonic fluid than a child with depletion of both sodium and water from diarrhea. Adjustment in the sodium concentration of the IV fluid is the most common approach to modify the rate of decrease in the serum concentration (see Fig. 75.1). For difficult-to-manage patients with severe hypernatremia, having two IV solutions (e.g., D5 ½ NS and D5 NS, both with the same concentration of potassium) at the bed- side can facilitate this approach by allowing for rapid adjustments of the rates of the two fluids. If the serum [Na*] decreases too rapidly, the rate of D5 NS can be increased and the rate of D5 ½ NS can be decreased by the same amount. Adjustment in the total rate of fluid delivery is another approach to modifying free water delivery. For example, if the serum [Nat] is decreasing too slowly, the rate of a hypotonic IV fluid can be increased, thereby increasing the delivery of free water. There is limited flexibility in modifying the rate of the IV fluid because patients generally should receive 1.25-1.5 times the normal maintenance fluid rate. Nevertheless, in some situations, it can be a helpful adjustment. Because increasing the rate of the IV fluid increases the rate of decline of the sodium concentration, signs of volume depletion are treated with additional isotonic fluid boluses. The serum [K*] and the level of renal function dictate the potassium concentration of the IV fluid; potassium is withheld until the patient voids. Patients with hypernatremic dehydration need an appropriate replacement solution if they have ongoing, excessive losses (see Chapter 74). 

532 • Part VI • Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders Restore intravascular volume: Normal saline: 20 mL/kg over 20 min (repeat until intravascular volume restored) Determine time for correction based on initial sodium concentration [Na] 145-157 mEq/L: 24 hr [Na] 158-170 mEq/L: 48 hr [Na] 171-183 mEq/L: 72 hr [Na] 184-196 mEq/L: 84 hr Administer fluid at a constant rate over the time for correction Typical fluid: D5 1/2 normal saline (with 20 mEq/L KCI unless contraindicated) Typical rate: 1.25-1.5 times maintenance Follow serum sodium concentration and adjust fluid based on clinical status and serum sodium concentration Signs of volume depletion Sodium decreases too rapidly Sodium decreases too slowly Replace excessive ongoing losses as they occur Administer normal saline (20 mL/kg) Increase sodium concentration of IV fluid or decrease rate of IV fluid Decrease sodium concentration of V fluid or increase rate of IV fluid Fig. 75.1 Algorithm for the treatment of hypernatremic dehydration. (From Londeree JT, Greenbaum LA. Dehydration and replacement therapy. In: Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Schuh AM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023. Fig 33.1.) Seizures and a depressed level of consciousness are the most com- mon manifestations of cerebral edema from an overly rapid decrease of the serum [Nat] during correction of hypernatremic dehydration. Signs of increased intracranial pressure or impending herniation may develop quite rapidly (see Chapter 82). Acutely, increasing the serum [Nat through an infusion of 3% sodium chloride can reverse the cere- bral edema. Each 1 mL/kg of 3% NaCl increases the serum [Na+] by approximately 1 mEq/L. An infusion of 4 mL/kg often results in resolu- tion of the symptoms. This strategy is similar to that used for treating symptomatic hyponatremia (see Chapter 73). Many patients with mild to moderate hypernatremic dehydration as a result of gastroenteritis can be managed with oral rehydration (see Chapter 387). In patients with severe hypernatremia, oral fluids must be used cautiously. Infant formula, because of its low sodium concen- tration, has a high free water content, and especially if added to IV therapy, it may contribute to a rapid decrease in the serum [Na+]. Less hypotonic fluid, such as an oral rehydration solution, may be more appropriate initially. If oral intake is allowed, its contribution to free water delivery must be taken into account, and adjustment in the IV fluid is usually appropriate. Judicious monitoring of the serum [Na*] Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Chapter 76 • Fluid and Electrolyte Treatment of Specific Disorders 533 Chapter 76 Fluid and Electrolyte Treatment of Specific Disorders ACUTE DIARRHEA See Chapter 387. PYLORIC STENOSIS See Chapter 375.1. PERIOPERATIVE FLUIDS See Chapter 91. 

Human Genetics PART VIII Chapter 95 Genetics in Pediatric Medicine Daryl A. Scott and Brendan Lee Since the completion of the Human Genome Project, there has been an unprecedented expansion in the understanding of how human health is impacted by variations in genomic sequence and epigenetic, non- sequence-based changes that affect gene expression. There has also been the development and implementation of accurate clinical tests that makes it easier for physicians to detect pathogenic variant changes. In addition, there has been a dramatic increase in the availability of information about the genetic aspects of pediatric diseases, particularly on the internet (Table 95.1). THE BURDEN OF GENETIC DISORDERS IN CHILDHOOD Medical problems associated with genetic disorders can appear at any age, with the most obvious and serious problems typically manitesting in childhood. It has been estimated that 53/1,000 children and young adults can be expected to have diseases with an important genetic component. If congenital anomalies are included, the rate increases to 79/1,000. In 1978 just over half of admissions to pediatric hospitals were for a genetic condition. By 1996, because of changes in healthcare delivery and a greater understanding of the genetic basis of many dis- orders, that percentage increased to 71% in one large pediatric hospital in the United States, with 96% of chronic disorders leading to admis- sion having an obvious genetic component or influenced by genetic susceptibility. Major categories of genetic disorders include single-gene, genomic, chromosomal, and multifactorial conditions. Individually, each single-gene disorder is rare, but collectively they represent an important contribution to childhood disease. The hall- mark of a single-gene disorder is that the phenotype is overwhelmingly determined by changes that affect an individual gene. The character and severity of a phenotype associated with some single-gene disor- ders can vary from one patient to another. In some cases, this may be due to differences in the severity of the change affecting the gene. In other cases, variability is seen in individuals who carry the same pathogenic variant or variants. This is termed variable expressiv- ity; the same pathogenic variants in GJB2 can cause mild, moderate, severe, or profound sensorineural hearing loss in different individuals. This variability may be due to differences in other genetic, epigenetic, environmental, and/or stochastic factors. If this variability results in some individuals being completely unaffected, we say that the disorder shows incomplete penetrance. Some single-gene disorders are asso- ciated with phenotypes that affect different organ systems or biologic functions that may appear unrelated. Pendred syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in SLC26A4 and is characterized by both hearing loss and thyroid enlargement (goiter). This feature of some genetic dis- eases is referred to as pleiotropy. Common single-gene disorders include sickle cell anemia and cystic fibrosis. Some identifiable syndromes and diseases can be caused by more than one gene. Noonan syndrome can be caused by pathogenic variants in at least 12 different genes. In addition, pathogenic variants Table 95.1 Useful Internet Genetic Reference Sites RESOURCE National Center for Biotechnology Information A general reference maintained by the National Library of Medicine Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man A useful resource for clinicians containing information on all known mendelian disorders and > 12,000 genes. Information focuses on the relationship between phenotype and genotype. Genetic Testing Registry A resource that provides information on individual genes, genetic tests, clinical laboratories, and medical conditions. This resource also provides access to GeneReviews, a collection of expert-authored reviews on a variety of genetic disorders. Genetics - MedlinePlus A resource that provides consumer-friendly information about the effects of genetic variations on human health National Human Genome Research Institute A resource for information about human genetics and ethical issues Human Gene Mutation Database A searchable index of all described pathogenic variants in human genes with phenotypes and references DECIPHER A database designed to aid physicians in determining the potential consequences of chromosomal deletions and duplications Database of Genomic Variants A database of chromosomal alterations seen in normal controls American Society of Human Genetics American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics 726 WEB ADDRESS www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr/ http://medlineplus.gov/genetics/ www.genome.gov www.hgmd.cf.ac.uk http://decipher.sanger.ac.uk http://dgv.tcag.ca/dgv/app/home www.ashg.org www.acmg.net/ 

affecting a single gene may cause more than one disorder. Variants in SCNSA can cause Brugada syndrome type 1, long &1 syndrome type 3, dilated cardiomyopathy type 1E, familial atrial fibrillation type 10, familial ventricular fibrillation type 1, progressive heart block type 1A, nonprogressive heart block, and sick sinus syndrome type 1. Single-gene disorders tend to occur when changes in a gene have a profound effect on the quantity of the gene product produced, either too much or too little, or the function of the gene product, either a loss of function or a harmful gain of function. Single-gene disorders can be caused by de novo sequence changes that are not found in the unaffected parents of the affected individual, or they may be caused by inheriting the affected gene. When a single-gene disorder is known to be caused by changes in only one gene, or a small number of indi- vidual genes, searching for deleterious changes is classically performed by directly sequencing that gene and, in some cases, looking for small deletions and/or duplications in that gene. When multiple genes can cause a particular disorder, it is sometimes more efficient and cost- effective to screen large numbers of disease-causing genes using a disease-specific panel, which takes advantage of massively parallel or next-generation sequencing technology, rather than screening genes individually. When such panels are not available, or when the diagnosis is in question, physicians may consider screening the protein-coding regions of all genes by exome sequencing (ES), also termed whole exome sequencing (WES), on a clinical basis. In many circumstances, ES is less expensive than sequencing multiple individual genes. Whole genome sequencing (WGS), in which an individual's entire genome is sequenced, is another clinical option (see Chapter 98; Table 95.2). The risk of having a child with a particular single-gene disorder can vary from one population to another. This may be the result of a founder effect, in which a specific change affecting a disease-causing gene becomes relatively common in a population derived from a small number of founder individuals. This high frequency is maintained when there is relatively little interbreeding with persons outside that population because of social, religious, or physical barriers. This is the case for Tay-Sachs disease in Ashkenazi Jews and French Canadians. Other changes may be subject to positive selection when found in the heterozygous carrier state. In this case, individuals who carry a single copy of a genetic change (heterozygotes) have a survival advantage over noncarriers. This can occur even when individuals who inherit two copies of the change (homozygotes) have severe medical prob- lems. This type of positive selection is evident among individuals in sub-Saharan Africa who carry a single copy of a hemoglobin patho- genic variant that confers relative resistance to malaria but causes sickle cell anemia in homozygotes. Genomic disorders are a group of diseases caused by alterations in the genome, including deletions (copy number loss), duplications (copy number gain), inversions (altered orientation of a genomic region), and chromosomal rearrangements (altered location of a genomic region). Contiguous gene disorders are caused by changes that affect two or more genes that contribute to the clinical phenotype and are located near one an other on a chromosome. DiGeorge syndrome, which is caused by deletions of genes located on chromosome 22q11, is a com- mon example. Some genomic disorders are associated with distinctive phenotypes whose patterns can be recognized clinically. Other genomic disorders do not have a distinctive pattern of anomalies but can cause developmental delay, cognitive impairment, structural birth defects, abnormal growth patterns, and changes in physical appearance. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) can provide informa- tion about the copy number and location of a specific genomic region. Array-based copy number detection assays, sometimes referred to as chromosomal microarray analyses, can be used to screen for chromo- somal deletions and duplications (large and small) across the genome but do not provide information about the orientation or location of genomic regions. A chromosome analysis (karyotype) can detect relatively large chromosomal deletions and duplications and also be useful in identifying inversions and chromosomal rearrange- ments even when they are copy number neutral changes that do not result in a deletion or duplication of genomic material (e.g., balanced translocations). Chapter 95 • Genetics in Pediatric Medicine 727 Table 95.2 Indications for Single Gene, Gene Panel, Exome, and Genome Sequencing EXAMPLES INDICATIONS SINGLE GENE Minimal locus heterogeneity CFTR for cystic fibrosis (only one or a small number of genes known to cause the condition) Distinctive clinical findings that PAH for phenylketonuria clearly point to specific gene GENE PANEL Locus heterogeneity (multiple Muscular dystrophy panel genes are known to cause the same or similar conditions) Disorders with overlapping Cardiomyopathy panel phenotypes Disorders that share one Epilepsy panel manifestation but can have very different presentations Disorders associated with genes RASopathy panel from a common pathway or structure EXOME Extreme heterogeneity and de Autism, intellectual disability novo mutations common Two or more unrelated Oculocutaneous albinism and phenotypes in one patient neutropenia No distinctive phenotypic feature Kabuki syndrome Phenotype indistinct and Congenital diarrhea, Zellweger underlying cause not clear GENOME As above for Exome, plus: Noncoding variation is Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy suspected as a cause Structural variation is suspected DiGeorge syndrome as a cause Exome sequencing already Undiagnosed Diseases Network performed and was nondiagnostic Rapid generation of sequencing data needed for patients who Neonates and children in intensive care are critically ill Suspected mitochondrial Whole genome and/or disorder: multisystem (heart, mitochondrial DNA (tissue) brain, muscle, liver) disorder sequencing From Manolio TA, Rowley R, Williams MS, et al. Opportunities, resources, and techniques for implementing genomics in clinical care. Lancet. 2019;394:511-520. Table 2. Deletions, duplications, and chromosomal rearrangements that affect whole chromosomes, or large portions of a chromosome, are typically referred to as chromosomal disorders. One of the most common chromosomal disorders is Down syndrome, which is most often associated with the presence of an extra copy, or trisomy, of an entire chromosome 21. When all or part of a chromosome is missing, the disorder is referred to as monosomy. Translocations are a type of chromosomal rearrangement in which a genomic region from one chromosome is transferred to a different location on the same chro- mosome or on a different (nonhomologous) chromosome. Transloca- tions can be balanced, meaning that no genetic material has been lost or gained, or they can be unbalanced, in which some genetic material has been deleted or duplicated. In some cases, only a portion of cells that make up a person's body are affected by a single-gene defect, a genomic disorder, or a chro- mosomal defect. This is referred to as mosaicism and indicates that the individual's body is made up of two or more distinct cell popula- tions. Through use of technologies with high sensitivity, it has become 

728 Part VIII • Human Genetics evident that there can be significant low-level mosaicism in somatic tissues. Polygenic disorders are caused by the cumulative effects of varia- tions in more than one gene. Multifactorial disorders are caused by the cumulative effects of variations in multiple genes or the combined effects of genetic, epigenetic, and/or environmental factors. Spina bifida and isolated cleft lip or palate are common birth defects that display multifactorial inheritance patterns. Multifactorial inheritance is seen in many common pediatric disorders, such as asthma and dia- betes mellitus. These traits can cluster in families but do not have a mendelian pattern of inheritance (see Chapter 97). In these cases, the genetic changes or variations that are contributing to a particular dis- order are often unknown, and genetic counseling is based on empirical data and estimates. THE CHANGING PARADIGM OF GENETICS IN Genetic testing is increasingly available for a wide variety of both rare and relatively common genetic disorders. Genetic testing is typically used in pediatric medicine to resolve uncertainty regarding the under- lying etiology of a child's medical problems. Identifying a molecular cause often provides the basis for improved genetic counseling, may alter medical management, and may suggest that a specific therapy should be employed. Even in cases where a specific treatment is not available, identifying a genetic cause can aid physicians in providing individuals and families with accurate prognostic and recurrence risk information, can often help to relieve unfounded feelings of guilt, and may stem the tide of misdirected blame. Genetic tests are influencing an increasing number of medical decisions and are becoming a seamless part of routine medical care Although most genetic testing is presently aimed at identifying or contrming a diagnosis, in the future genetic testing may hind wider application as a means of determining whether an individual is predis- posed to develop a particular disease. Another area in which genetic testing could make a significant impact is on individualized drug treatment (pharmacogenetics). It has long been known that genetic variation in the enzymes involved in drug metabolism underlies dif- ferences in the therapeutic effect and toxicity of some drugs. When the genetic changes that underlie these variations are identified, new genetic tests can be developed that allow physicians to tailor treat- ments based on individual variations in drug metabolism, responsive- ness, and susceptibility to toxicity. It is likely that the expansion of such testing will depend, at least in part, on the extent to which such tests can be linked to strategies to prevent disease or improve outcome (see Chapter 98). Long-standing and highly successful carrier screening programs have existed for disorders such as Tay-Sachs disease and many other rare, single-gene disorders that are prevalent in specific populations. Couples are usually offered screening for a variety of conditions based, in part, on ancestry (Tay-Sachs disease, hemoglobinopathies, cystic fibrosis). Couples found to be at increased risk for such disorders can be offered preconception or prenatal testing aimed at detecting specific disease-causing variants. Prenatal screening is routinely offered for chromosomal disorders such as trisomy 13, trisomy 18, and Down syndrome. Pregnancies affected by these, and possibly other genetic disorders, are being rec- ognized by noninvasive screening tests targeting fetal cell-free DNA in maternal blood and by fetal ultrasound. When genetic disorders are suspected, chorionic villus sampling at 10-12 weeks of gestation or amniocentesis at 16-18 weeks of gestation can provide material for genetic testing. When a couple are at risk for a specific genetic defect, preimplantation genetic diagnosis can sometimes be used to select unaffected early embryos, which are then implanted as part of an in vitro fertilization procedure. Although prenatally obtained genetic material can be used to iden- tify single-gene disorders, genomic disorders, and chromosomal anomalies, the information obtained on any pregnancy depends on the tests that are ordered. It is important that physicians select the most appropriate prenatal tests and that couples understand the limitations of these tests. No amount of genetic testing can guarantee the birth of a healthy child. Specific treatments are not available for most genetic disorders, although some important exceptions exist (see Chapter 98). Inborn errors of metabolism were the first genetic disorders to be recog- nized, and many are amenable to treatment by dietary manipulation (see Chapter 104). These conditions result from genetically determined deficiency of specific enzymes, leading to the buildup of toxic sub- strates and/or deficiency of critical end products. Individual metabolic disorders tend to be very rare, but their com- bined impact on the pediatric population is significant. Tandem mass spectrometry has made it relatively inexpensive to screen for a large number of these disorders in the newborn period. Use of this technol- ogy not only dramatically increases the number of metabolic disorders identified within a population but also allows treatment to be initi- ated at a much earlier stage in development. Broader screening in the postnatal period, in the form of metabolomic screening, has increased the potential for identifying an increasing list of rare inborn errors of metabolism, especially when combined with exome or genome sequencing. Progress in genetic therapies has improved the treatment of some lysosomal storage disorders (see Chapter 106.4). These metabolic dis- eases are caused by defects in lysosomal function. Lysosomes are cel- lular organelles that contain specific digestive enzymes. Some of these disorders that were characterized by early lethal or intractable chronic illness can now be treated using specially modified enzymes adminis- tered by intravenous infusion. These enzymes are taken up by cells and incorporated into lysosomes. Conditions such as Gaucher disease and Fabry disease are routinely treated using enzyme replacement; similar therapies are being developed for other lysosomal disorders. Therapeutic advances are also being made in the treatment of non- metabolic genetic disorders. Improvements in surgical techniques and intensive care medicine are extending the survival of children with life- threatening birth defects such as congenital diaphragmatic hernia and severe cardiac defects. In many cases, the life expectancy of children with debilitating genetic disorders is also increasing. Improvements in nutrition and the management of chronic pulmonary disease in patients with cystic fibrosis allow an increasing percentage of affected patients to survive into adulthood, creating a need to transition care from pediatric to adult providers. Gene replacement therapies are being used in the treatment of a variety of genetic disorders (see Chapter 98). Stem cell-based thera- pies have also been employed as a potential treatment for a number of intractable disorders. DIRECT-TO-CONSUMER GENETIC TESTING In most cases, healthcare providers order genetic tests, interpret the results, communicate these results to their patients, and then docu- ment these finding in the medical record. The costs of these tests are often covered completely or in part by a health insurance company. In contrast, some companies are offering direct-to-consumer genetic tests in which individuals order their own tests and receive test results directly from the company. The individual usually pays for these tests, and the results are not recorded in their medical record unless the indi- vidual chooses to share this information with their healthcare provid- ers. Some direct-to-consumer genetic tests only provide information about common traits or information about an individuals ancestry or relationship to others (ancestry testing). Other direct-to-consumer tests are designed to make predictions about health and/or to identify pathogenic variants associated with specific genetic disorders. In some cases, individuals ordering these tests may have the option of review- ing their results with a healthcare provider employed by the company performing the test. One of the main benefits of direct-to-consumer testing is that it allows individuals to privately access their genetic information without having to involve a healthcare provider or their insurance company. Although this could be seen as a means of empowering individuals with regards to their healthcare, the benefits derived from such testing depend heavily on the appropriateness of the test ordered, the quality of 

the testing/reporting services, the capacity of the individual to under- stand the test results, and their ability to make informed choices based on those results. ETHICS ISSUES efforts should be made to avoid any stigma for the patient. Many peo- ple worry that results of genetic testing will put them, or their child, at risk for genetic discrimination. Genetic discrimination occurs when people are treated unfairly because of a difference in their DNA that suggests they have a genetic disorder or they are at an increased risk of developing a certain disease. In the United States the Genetic Informa- tion Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 protects individuals from genetic discrimination at the hands of health insurers and employers but does not extend protection against discrimination from providers of life, disability, or long-term care insurance. The decisions about genetic testing should be based on a careful evaluation of the potential benefits and risks. In the pediatric setting, these decisions may be more difficult because physicians and are often called on to make decisions for a child who cannot directly participate in discussions about testing. Molecular diagnostic tests are often used to diagnose malformation syndromes, cognitive delay, or other disabilities in which there is a clear benefit to the child. In other cases, such as genetic testing for susceptibility to adult-onset diseases, it is appropriate to wait until the child or adolescent is mature enough to weigh the potential risks and benefits and make their own decisions about genetic testing. Policies regarding genetic testing of children have been developed collaboratively by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG; Pedi- atrics 131[3]:620-622, 2013). These recommendations are outlined in the following list. General Recommendations 1. Decisions about whether to offer genetic testing and screening should be driven by the best interest of the child. 2. Genetic testing is best offered in the context of genetic coun seling. Genetic counseling can be performed by clinical geneti- cists, genetic counselors, or any other healthcare provider with appropriate training and expertise. AAP and ACMG support the expansion of educational opportunities in human genom- ics and genetics for medical students, residents, and practicing pediatric primary care providers. Diagnostic Testing 3. In a child with symptoms of a genetic condition, the rationale for genetic testing is similar to other medical diagnostic evalu- ations. Parents or guardians should be informed about the risks and benefits of testing, and their permission should be obtained. Ideally, and when appropriate, the assent of the child should be obtained. 4. When performed for therapeutic purposes, pharmacogenetic testing of children is acceptable, with permission of parents or guardians and, when appropriate, the child's assent. If a pharma- cogenetic test result carries implications beyond drug targeting or dose responsiveness, the broader implications should be dis- cussed before testing. Newborn Screening 5. AAP and ACMG support the mandatory offering of newborn screening for all children. After education and counseling about the substantial benefits of newborn screening, its remote risks, and the next steps in the event of a positive screening result, parents should have the option of refusing the procedure, and an informed refusal should be respected. Carrier Testing 6. AAP and ACMG do not support routine carrier testing in minors when such testing does not provide health benents in childhood. The AAP and ACMG advise against school-based testing or screening programs, because the school environment Chapter 95 • Genetics in Pediatric Medicine 729 is unlikely to be conducive to voluntary participation, thought- ful consent, privacy, confidentiality, or appropriate counseling about test results. 7. For pregnant adolescents or for adolescents considering repro- duction, genetic testing and screening should be offered as clini- cally indicated, and the risks and benefits should be explained Predictive Genetic Testing 8. Parents or guardians may authorize predictive genetic testing for asymptomatic children at risk of childhood-onset conditions. Ideally, the assent of the child should be obtained. 9. Predictive genetic testing for adult-onset conditions generally should be deferred unless an intervention initiated in childhood may reduce morbidity or mortality. An exception might be made for families for whom diagnostic uncertainty poses a sig- nificant psychosocial burden, particularly when an adolescent and the parents concur in their interest in predictive testing 10. For ethical and legal reasons, healthcare providers should be cautious about providing predictive genetic testing to minors without the involvement of their parents or guardians, even if a minor is mature. Results of such tests may have significant medical, psychologic, and social implications, not only for the minor but also for other family members. Histocompatibility Testing 11. Tissue compatibility testing of minors of all ages is permissible to benefit immediate family members but should be conducted only after thorough exploration of the psychosocial, emotional, and physical implications of the minor serving as a potential stem cell donor. A donor advocate or similar mechanism should be in place from the outset to avert coercion and safeguard the interests of the child. Adoption 12. The rationale for genetic testing of children in biological families should apply for adopted children and children awaiting place- ment for adoption. If a child has a known genetic risk, prospec- tive adoptive parents must be made aware of this possibility. In rare cases, it may be in a child's best interest to undergo predic- tive genetic testing for a known risk before adoption to ensure the child's placement with a family capable of and willing to ac- cept the child's potential medical and developmental challenges. In the absence of such indications, genetic testing should not be performed as a condition of adoption. Disclosure 13. At the time of genetic testing, parents or guardians should be encouraged to inform their child of the test results at an appro- priate age. Parents or guardians should be advised that, under most circumstances, a request by a mature adolescent for test results should be honored. 14. Results from genetic testing of a child may have implications for the parents and other family members. Healthcare providers have an obligation to inform parents and the child, when appro- priate, about these potential implications. Healthcare providers should encourage patients and families to share this information and offer to help explain the results to the extended family or refer them for genetic counseling 15. Misattributed paternity, use of donor gametes, adoption, or other questions about family relationships may be uncovered "incidentally" whenever genetic testing is performed, particu- larly when testing multiple family members. This risk should be discussed, and a plan about disclosure or nondisclosure should be in place before testing. Direct-to-Consumer Testing 16. AAP and ACMG strongly discourage the use of direct-to- consumer and home-kit genetic testing of children because of the lack of oversight on test content, accuracy, and interpreta- tion. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

730 Part VIII • Human Genetics Chapter 96 Principles of Human Genetics Daryl A. Scott and Brendan Lee THE HUMAN GENOME The human genome has approximately 20,000 genes that encode the wide variety of proteins found in the human body. Reproductive or germline cells contain one copy (N) of this genetic complement and are haploid, whereas somatic (nongermline) cells contain two complete copies (2N) and are diploid. Genes are organized into long segments of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which, during cell division, are com- pacted into intricate structures together with proteins to form chromo- somes. Each somatic cell has 46 chromosomes: 22 pairs of autosomes, or nonsex chromosomes, and one pair of sex chromosomes (XY in a male, XX in a female). Germ cells (ova or sperm) contain 22 autosomes and one sex chromosome, for a total of 23. At fertilization, the full dip- loid chromosome complement of 46 is again realized in the embryo. Most of the genetic material is contained in the cell's nucleus. The mitochondria (the cell's energy-producing organelles) contain their own unique genome. The mitochondrial chromosome consists of a double-stranded circular piece of DNA, which contains 16,568 base pairs (bp) of DNA and is present in multiple copies per cell. The pro- teins that occupy the mitochondria are produced either in the mito- chondria, using information contained in the mitochondrial genome, or are produced outside of the mitochondria, using information con- tained in the nuclear genome, and then transported into the organ- elle. Sperm do not usually contribute mitochondria to the developing embryo, so all mitochondria are maternally derived, and a child's mito- chondrial genetic makeup derives exclusively from the child's biologic mother (see Chapter 108). FUNDAMENTALS OF MOLECULAR GENETICS DNA consists of a pair of chains of a sugar-phosphate backbone linked by pyrimidine and purine bases to form a double helix (Fig. 96.1). The sugar in DNA is deoxyribose. The pyrimidines are cytosine (C) and thymine (T), and the purines are guanine (G) and adenine (A). The bases are linked by hydrogen bonds such that A always pairs with T and G with C. Each strand of the double helix has polarity, with a free phosphate at one end (5) and an unbonded hydroxyl on the sugar at the other end (3'). The two strands are oriented in opposite polarity in the double helix. The replication of DNA follows the pairing of bases in the parent DNA strand. The original two strands unwind by breaking the hydro- gen bonds between base pairs. Free nucleotides, consisting of a base attached to a sugar-phosphate chain, form new hydrogen bonds with their complementary bases on the parent strand; new phosphodies- ter bonds are created by enzymes called DNA polymerases. Replica- tion of chromosomes begins simultaneously at multiple sites, forming replication bubbles that expand bidirectionally until the entire DNA molecule (chromosome) is replicated. Errors in DNA replication, or pathogenic variants induced by environmental mutagens such as irra- diation or chemicals, are detected and potentially corrected by DNA repair systems. Information encoded in DNA, predominantly located in the cell's nucleus, is transcribed into messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), which is then transported to the cytoplasm, where it is translated into protein. A prototypical gene consists of a regulatory region, segments called exons that encode the amino acid sequence of a protein, and intervening segments called introns (Fig. 96.2). Transcription is initiated by attachment of ribonucleic acid (RNA) polymerase to the promoter site upstream of the beginning of the coding sequence. Specific proteins bind to the region to repress or activate transcription by compacting or opening chromatin, which is a complex of DNA and histone proteins. It is the action of these regulatory proteins (transcription factors) that determines, in large part, when a gene is turned on or off. Some genes are also turned on and off by methylation of cytosine bases that are adjacent to guanine bases (cytosine-phosphate-guanine bases [CpGs]). Methylation is an example of an epigenetic change, meaning a change that can affect gene expression, and possibly the characteristics of a cell or organism, but that does not involve a change in the underlying genetic sequence. Gene regulation is flexible and responsive, with genes being turned on or off during development and in response to internal and external envi- ronmental conditions and stimuli. Another epigenetic mechanism that controls gene expression is the biochemical modification of histone proteins around which DNA is wound. These modifications can affect the relative accessibility of chromatin by enzymes for transcription. Transcription proceeds through the entire length of the gene in a 5' to 3' direction to form an mRNA transcript whose sequence is comple- mentary to that of one of the DNA strands. RNA is a sugar-phosphate chain with pyrimidines and purines. In RNA the sugar is ribose, and uracil replaces the thymine found in DNA. A "cap" consisting of 7- methylguanosine is added to the 5' end of the RNA in a 5'-5' bond and, for most transcripts, several hundred adenine bases are enzymati- cally added to the 3' end after transcription. mRNA processing occurs in the nucleus and consists of excision of the introns and splicing together of the exons. Specific sequences at the start and end of introns mark the sites where the splicing machinery will act on the transcript. In some cases, there may be tissue-specific patterns to splicing, so that the same primary transcript can produce multiple distinct proteins. The processed transcript is next exported to the cytoplasm, where it binds to ribosomes, which are complexes of protein and ribosomal RNA (rRNA). The genetic code is then read in triplets of bases, each triplet corresponding with a specific amino acid or providing a signal that terminates translation. The triplet codons are recognized by trans- fer RNAs (tRNAs) that include complementary anticodons and bind the corresponding amino acid, delivering it to the growing peptide. New amino acids are enzymatically, sequentially attached to the grow- ing peptide. Each time an amino acid is added, the ribosome moves one triplet codon step along the mRNA. Eventually a stop codon is reached, at which point translation ends and the peptide is released. In some proteins, there are posttranslational modifications, such as attachment of sugars (glycosylation). The protein is then delivered to its destination within or outside the cell by trafficking mechanisms that recognize portions of the peptide. Another mechanism of gene regulation is noncoding RNAs, which are RNAs transcribed from DNA but not translated into proteins. Non- coding RNAs function in many contexts, including mediating splic- ing, the processing of coding RNAs in the nucleus, and the translation of coding mRNAs in ribosomes. The roles of long noncoding RNAs (>200 bp) and short noncoding RNAs (<200 bp) extend beyond these processes to impact a diverse set of biologic functions, including the regulation of gene expression. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small RNAs that control gene expression in the cell by directly target- ing specific sets of coding RNAs by direct RNA-RNA binding. This RNA-RNA interaction can lead to degradation of the target-coding RNA or inhibition of translation of the protein specified by that coding RNA. miRNAs often target and regulate several hundred mRNAs. GENETIC VARIATION The process of producing protein from a gene is subject to disrup- tion at multiple levels because of alterations in the DNA sequence (Fig. 96.3). Changes in the regulatory region can lead to altered gene expression, including increased or decreased rates of transcription, failure of gene activation, or activation of the gene at inappropri- ate times or in inappropriate cells. Changes in the coding sequence can lead to substitution of one amino acid for another (missense variant or nonsynonymous variant) or creation of a stop codon in the place of an amino acid codon (nonsense or stop-gain variant). 

5' — One helical tum = 3.4 nm — Sugar-phosphate backbone Bases Adenine Thymine Guanine Cytosine 3 5 Fig. 96.1 DNA double helix, with sugar-phosphate backbone and ni- trogenous bases. (From Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ, et al., eds. Medical Genetics, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 1999: p. 8.) Non-transcribed strand- 5' 3' Exons: 2 Transcribed strand 5' 4 1. Transcription 5' CAP- RNA Chapter 96 • Principles of Human Genetics 731 Overall, missense and nonsense variants are the most common (56% of variants); small deletions or insertions represent approximately 24% of variants (Table 96.1). Some single-base changes do not affect the amino acid (silent, wobble, or synonymous variants) because there may be several triplet codons that correspond to the same single amino acid. Amino acid substitutions can have a profound effect on protein function if the chemical properties of the substituted amino acid are markedly different. Other substitutions can have a subtle or no effect on protein function, particularly if the substituted amino acid is chemically similar to the original. Single nucleotide changes, whether silent or missense, are termed single nucleotide variants Genetic changes can also include insertions or deletions ("in- dels"). Insertions or deletions of a nonintegral multiple of three bases into the coding sequence leads to a frameshift, altering the grouping of bases into triplets. This leads to translation of an incorrect amino acid sequence and often a premature stop to translation. Insertion or deletion of an integral multiple of three bases into the coding sequence will insert or delete a corresponding number of amino acids from the protein, leading to in-frame alterations that maintain the amino acid sequence outside the deleted or duplicated amino acids. Larger scale insertions or deletions can disrupt a coding sequence or result in com- plete deletion of an entire gene or group of genes. Pathogenic variants usually can be classified as causing a loss of func- tion or a gain of function. Loss-of-function variants lead to a reduc- tion in the level of protein function as a result of decreased expression or production of a protein that does not work as efficiently. In some cases, loss of protein function from one of two alleles is sufficient to cause disease. Haploinsufficiency describes the situation in which maintenance of a normal phenotype requires the proteins produced by both alleles of a gene, and a 50% decrease in gene function results in an abnormal phenotype. Haploinsufhcient phenotypes are domi- nantly inherited. Loss-of-function variants can also have a dominant 3 3' 3' 5' 3' polyA addition 2. RNA processing and splicing Nucleus 3. Transport Cytoplasm 5' 5' ПАААА З 4. Translation AAAA 3' Growing polypeptide chain AAAA 3' 5' Ribosomes 5. Protein assembly Completed polypeptide Fig. 96.2 Flow of information from DNA to RNA to protein for a hypothetical gene with three exons and two introns. Within the exons, colored regions indicate coding sequences. Steps include transcription, RNA processing and splicing, RNA transport from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, translation, and protein assembly. (From Nussbaum RL, Mcinnis RR, Willard HF, Hamosh A, eds. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007: p. 31.) 

732 Part VIII • Human Genetics Promoter Intron Exon Intron Increased or decreased level of transcription TCC CAA ATC GTC CCT CGA GTT Wild type sequence ser gin ile val pro arg val TCC CAG ATC GTC CCT CGA GTT Silent variant ser gin ile val pro arg val TCC CAG ATOCTO CCT CGA GTT Conservative variant ser gin ile leu pro arg val TCC CAG ATC CTC GCY CGA GTT Missense variant ser gin ile leu ala arg val TCC CAA ATC GTC CCT TGA GTT Nonsense variant ser gin ile val pro stop TCC CAG AAT CGT CCC TCG AGT Frameshift insertion ser gin asn arg pro ser ser Exon Inclusion of intron in processed mRNA Exon skip Exon Fig. 96.3 Various types of intra- genic sequence variants. Promoter variants alter rate of transcription or disrupt gene regulation. Base changes within exons can have various effects, as shown. Variants within introns can lead to inclusion of some intronic sequence in the fi- nal processed mRNA, or it can lead to exon skipping. Table 96.1 Main Classes, Groups, and Types of Sequence Variants and Their Effects on Protein Products GROUP TYPE EFFECT ON PROTEIN PRODUCT CLASS Substitution Synonymous Nonsynonymous Deletion Multiple of three (codon) Not multiple of three Large deletion Insertion Multiple of three (codon) Not multiple of three Large insertion Silent* Missense* Nonsense or stop-gain* Same amino acid Altered amino acid-may affect protein function or stability Stop codon-loss of function or expression from degradation of mRNA Splice site Promoter Aberrant splicing exon skipping or intron retention Altered gene expression In-frame deletion of one or more amino acid(s)-may affect protein function or stability Frameshift Likely to result in premature termination with loss of function or expression Partial gene deletion May result in premature termination with loss of function or expression Whole gene deletion Loss of expression In-frame insertion of one or more amino acid(s)-may affect protein function or stability Frameshift Likely to result in premature termination with loss of function or expression Partial gene duplication May result in premature termination with loss of function or expression Whole gene duplication May have an effect because of increased gene dosage Dynamic pathogenic variant Altered gene expression or altered protein stability or function Expansion of trinucleotide repeat *Some have been shown to cause aberrant splicing. From Turnpenny P, Ellard S, eds. Emery's Elements of Medical Genetics, 14th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2012: p. 23. negative effect when the abnormal protein product actively interferes with the function of the normal protein product. Both situations lead to diseases inherited in a dominant fashion. Haploinsufficiency of type I collagen can cause relatively mild osteogenesis imperfecta (Ol) type I. In contrast, heterozygous, missense glycine substitutions in type 1 col- lagen can act in a dominant negative fashion to cause severe OI type II, III, and IV. In other cases, loss-of-function variants must be present in both copies of a gene before an abnormal phenotype results. This situ- ation typically results in diseases inherited in a recessive fashion (see Chapter 97). Some conditions are semidominant where one affected copy (heterozygous pathogenic variant) causes a milder phenotype than when both copies are affected (compound heterozygous or homo- zygous pathogenic variants). This is seen in classical achondroplasia vs homozygous achondroplasia Gain-of-function variants typically cause dominantly inherited diseases. These variants can result in production of a protein mol- ecule with an increased ability to perform a normal function or can confer a novel property on the protein. The gain-of-function variant 

in achondroplasia, the most common of the disproportionate, short- limbed short stature disorders, exemplifies the enhanced function of a normal protein. Achondroplasia results from a pathogenic variant in the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor three gene (FGFR3), which leads to activation of the receptor, even in the absence of FGF. In sickle cell disease, an amino acid is substituted into the hemoglobin mol- ecule and has little effect on the ability of the protein to transport oxy- gen. However, sickle hemoglobin chains have a novel property. Unlike normal hemoglobin, sickle hemoglobin chains aggregate under condi- tions of deoxygenation, forming fibers that deform the red cells. Other gain-of-function variants result in overexpression or inap- propriate expression of a gene product. Many cancer-causing genes (oncogenes) are normal regulators of cellular proliferation during development. However, expression of these genes in adult life and/or in cells in which they usually are not expressed can result in neoplasia. In some cases, changes in gene expression are caused by changes in the number of copies of a gene that are present in the genome (Fig. 96.4). Although some copy number variations are common and do not appear to cause or predispose to disease, others are clearly dis- ease causing. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A, the most com- mon inherited form of chronic peripheral neuropathy of childhood, is caused by duplications of the gene for peripheral myelin protein 22, resulting in overexpression due to the existence of three active copies of this gene (see Chapter 653.1). Deletions of this same gene, leaving Labeling Samples mixed Hybridization to arrays Combine dye-swap experiments and calculate fluorescence ratio Deletion Spurious signal from one dye- swap experiment Ratio (test:reference) puplication 0.5 1 Mb 2 Mb 3 Mb 4 Mb Fig. 96.4 Array comparative genomic hybridization. Test and refer- ence DNA samples are differentially labeled, mixed, and passed over a target array of probes (e.g., bacterial artificial chromosome clones or oligonucleotides) containing DNA fragments from across the whole human genome. The experiment is often repeated with reversal of the test and reference dyes to detect dye effects or identify spurious sig- nals. DNA samples hybridize with their corresponding probe, and the ratio of fluorescence from each probe (test:reference) is used to detect regions that vary in copy number between the test and the reference sample (red line, original hybridization; blue line, dye-swapped hybridi- zation). Equal copy number for both the test and the reference DNA is identified by equal binding, resulting in a ratio of 1:1. Duplication in a genomic region of the test sample is identified by an increased ratio, and a deletion is identitied by a decreased ratio, but a deletion in the test sample is indistinguishable from a duplication in the reference sam- ple. These ratios are usually converted to log2 scale for further analysis. Mb, megabase. (Adapted from Feuk L, Carson AR, Scherer SW. Struc- tural variation in the human genome. Nat Rev Genet 2006;7:85-97.) Chapter 96 • Principles of Human Genetics 733 only one active copy, are responsible for a different disorder, heredi- tary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies. Deletions and duplications can vary in their extent and can involve several genes, even when they are not detectable using a traditional chromosome analysis. Such changes are commonly called microdele- tions and microduplications. When deletion or duplication of two or more genes in the same chromosomal region each play a role in the resulting clinical features, the condition can also be referred to as a contiguous gene disorder. In some cases, the recognition of a specific constellation of features leads clinicians to suspect a specific microdeletion or microduplica- tion syndrome. Examples of such disorders include Smith-Magenis, DiGeorge, and Williams syndromes. In other cases, the clinician may be alerted to this possibility by an unusually diverse array of clinical features in one patient or the presence of unusual features in a per- son with a known condition. Because of the close physical proximity of a series of genes, different deletions involving the short arm of the X chromosome can produce individuals with various combinations of ichthyosis, Kallmann syndrome, ocular albinism, intellectual disability, chondrodysplasia punctata, and short stature. DNA rearrangements can also take place in somatic cells (cells that do not go on to produce ova or sperm). Rearrangements that occur in lymphoid cells are required for the normal formation of functional immunoglobulin in B cells and antigen-recognizing receptors on 1 cells. Large segments of DNA, which code for the variable and the con- stant regions of either immunoglobulin or the T-cell receptor (TCR), are physically joined at a specific stage in the development of an immu- nocompetent lymphocyte. These rearrangements take place during development of the lymphoid cell lineage in humans and result in the extensive diversity of immunoglobulin and TCR molecules. Because of this postgermline DNA rearrangement, no two individuals, not even identical twins, are fully identical, because mature lymphocytes from each will have undergone random DNA rearrangements at these loci. The human genome demonstrates that any two individuals will dif- fer in about one base in 1,000. Some of these differences are silent; some result in changes that explain phenotypic differences (hair or eye color, physical appearance); and some have medical significance, causing single-gene disorders such as sickle cell anemia or explaining susceptibility to common pediatric disorders such as asthma. Genetic variants in a single gene that occur at a frequency of >1% in a popula- tion are often referred to as polymorphisms. These variations may be silent or subtle or may have significant phenotypic effects. GENOTYPE-PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS IN GENETIC DISEASE The term genotype is used to signify the internally coded, heritable information of an individual and can also be used to refer to which particular alternative version (allele) of a gene is present at a specific location (locus) on a chromosome. A phenotype is the observed structural, biochemical, and physiologic characteristics of an individ- ual, determined by the genotype, and can also refer to the observed structural and functional effects of a variant allele at a specific locus. Many sequence variants result in predictable phenotypes; physicians can predict clinical outcomes and plan appropriate treatment strate- gies based on a patient's genotype. There is also phenotypic expansion where multiple alleles (variants) within a gene can be associated with often diverse and distinct clinical presentations. Long QT syndrome exemplifies a disorder with predictable asso- ciations between a patient's genotype and his or her phenotype (see Chapter 484.5). Long QT syndrome is genetically heterogeneous, meaning that pathogenic variants in several different genes can cause the same disorder. The risk for cardiac events (syncope, aborted cardiac arrest, or sudden death) is higher in patients with long QT syndrome involving KCNQ1 (63%) or KCNH2 (46%) than in those with patho- genic variants in SCN5A (18%). In addition, individuals with KCNQ1 variants experience most of their episodes during exercise and rarely during rest or sleep. In contrast, individuals with pathogenic variants in KCNH2 and SCN5A are more likely to have episodes during sleep or rest and rarely during exercise. Therefore variants in specific genes 

734 Part VIII • Human Genetics (genotype) are correlated with specific manifestations (phenotype) of long QT syndrome. These types of relationships are commonly referred to as genotype-phenotype correlations. Pathogenic variants in the brillin-l gene associated with Mar- tan syndrome represent another example of predictable genotype- phenotype correlations (see Chapter 743). Marfan syndrome is characterized by the combination of skeletal, ocular, and aortic mani- festations, with the most devastating outcome being aortic root dissec- tion and sudden death. The fibrillin-1 gene consists of 65 exons, and pathogenic variants have been found in almost all these. The location of the variant within the gene (genotype) might play a significant role in determining the severity of the condition (phenotype). Neonatal Marfan syndrome is often caused by variants in exons 24-27 and in exons 31 and 32, whereas milder forms are caused by variants in exons 59-65 and in exons 37 and 41. Genotype-phenotype correlations have also been observed in some complications of cystic fibrosis (CF; see Chapter 454). Although pulmo- nary disease is the major cause of morbidity and mortality, CF is a multi- system disorder that affects not only the epithelia of the respiratory tract but also the exocrine pancreas, intestine, male genital tract, hepatobiliary system, and exocrine sweat glands. CF is caused by pathogenic variants in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. More than 1,600 different pathogenic CFTR variants have been identified. The most common is a deletion of three nucleotides that removes the amino acid phenylalanine (F) at the 508th position on the protein (AF508 vari- ant), which accounts for approximately 70% of all pathogenic CF vari- ants and is associated with severe disease. The best genotype-phenotype correlations in CF are seen in the context of pancreatic function, with common pathogenic variants being classified as either pancreatic suffi- cient or pancreatic insufficient. Persons with pancreatic sufficiency usu- ally have either one or two pancreatic-sufficient alleles, indicating that pancreatic-sufficient alleles are dominant. In contrast, the genotype- phenotype correlation in pulmonary disease is much weaker, and per- sons with identical genotypes have wide variations in the severity of their pulmonary disease. This finding may be accounted for, in part, by genetic modifiers or environmental factors. In many disorders, the effects of variants on phenotype can be modi- fied by changes in the other allele of the same gene, by changes in spe- cific modifier genes, and/or by variations in a number of unspecified genes (genetic background). When sickle cell anemia is co-inherited with the gene for hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin, the sickle cell phenotypic expression is less severe. Modifier genes in CF can influence the development of congenital meconium ileus, or coloni- zation with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Modifier genes can also affect the manifestations of Hirschsprung disease, neurofibromatosis type 2, craniosynostosis, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The combina- tion of genetic variants producing glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and longer versions of the TATAA element in the uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase gene promoter exacerbates neo- natal physiologic hyperbilirubinemia. HUMAN GENOME PROJECT A rudimentary genetic map can be made using genetic linkage, which is based on the principle that alleles at two genetic loci that are located near each other segregate together in a family unless they are sepa- rated by genetic recombination. In contrast to linkage maps, physical maps rely on overlapping DNA fragments to determine the location of loci with respect to one another. Overlapping segments of the genomic regions can be identified and used to piece together a map composed of overlapping DNA fragments to obtain the DNA sequence of the entire region. An alternative strategy involves breaking the entire genome into random fragments, sequencing the fragments, and then computation- ally assembling them into overlapping segments. This whole genome approach in combination with next-generation sequencing technolo- gies has resulted in a dramatic reduction in the cost of sequencing an individual's entire genome. Analysis of the human genome has produced some surprising results. The number of genes appears to be ~20,000. However, the num- ber of protein products encoded by the genome is far greater than the Fig. 96.5 Microarray containing 36,000 oligonucleotides. The micro- array was exposed to RNA from normal fibroblasts (labeled in red; see arrows) and fibroblasts from a patient with Niemann-Pick disease, type C (labeled green). Arrows point to regions in which there was a strong hybridization signal with either normal or disease RNA. This microarray was used to search for genes that are highly expressed in the fibroblasts of patients. (From Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ, White RL. Medical Genetics, 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2006: p. 116.) number of genes. This is a result of the presence of alternative promoter regions, alternative splicing, and posttranslational modifications, which can allow a single gene to encode a number of protein products. It is also apparent that most of the human genome does not encode protein, with <5% being transcribed and translated, although a much larger percentage may be transcribed without translation. Many tran- scribed sequences are not translated but represent genes that encode RNAs that serve regulatory roles. A large fraction of the genome con- sists of repeated sequences that are interspersed among the genes. Some of these are transposable genetic elements that can move from place to place in the genome. Others are static elements that were expanded and dispersed in the past during human evolution. Other repeated sequences might play a structural role. There are also regions of genomic duplica- tions. Such duplications are substrate for evolution, allowing genetic motifs to be copied and modified to serve new roles in the cell. Dupli- cations can also play a role in chromosomal rearrangement, permitting nonhomologous chromosome segments to pair during meiosis and exchange material. This is another source of evolutionary change and a potential source of chromosomal instability leading to congenital anom- alies or cancer. Low copy repeats also play an important role in caus- ing genomic disorders. When low copy repeats flank unique genomic segments, these regions can be duplicated or deleted through a process known as nonallelic homologous recombination. Availability of the entire human genomic sequence permits the study of large groups of genes, looking for patterns of gene expression or genome alteration. Studies of gene expression are performed using next-generation sequencing techniques to obtain information about all RNA transcripts in a tissue or single cell. The patterns of gene expres- sion may provide signatures for particular disease states, such as can- cer, or change in response to therapy (Fig. 96.5). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Chapter 97 Patterns of Genetic Transmission Daryl A. Scott and Brendan Lee FAMILY HISTORY AND PEDIGREE NOTATION The family history remains the most important screening tool for pedi- atricians in identifying a patient's risk for developing a wide range of diseases, from multifactorial conditions such as diabetes and attention- deficit/hyperactivity disorder, to single-gene disorders such as sickle cell anemia and cystic fibrosis. Through a detailed family history, the physician can often ascertain the mode of genetic transmission and the risks to family members. Because not all familial clustering of disease is caused by genetic factors, a family history can also identify common environmental and behavioral factors that influence the occurrence of disease. The main goal of the family history is to identify genetic sus- ceptibility, and the cornerstone of the family history is a systematic and standardized pedigree. A pedigree provides a graphic depiction of a family's structure and medical history. It is important when taking a pedigree to be system- atic and use standard symbols and configurations so that anyone can read and understand the information (Figs. 97.1-97.4). In the pediatric setting, the proband is typically the child or adolescent who is being evaluated. The proband is designated in the pedigree by an arrow. A three- to four-generation pedigree should be obtained for every new patient as an initial screen for genetic disorders segregating within the family. The pedigree can provide clues to the inheritance pattern of these disorders and can aid the clinician in determining the risk to the proband and other family members. The closer the relationship of the proband to the person in the family with the genetic disorder, the greater is the shared genetic complement. First-degree relatives, such as a parent, full sibling, or child, share one half their genetic informa- tion on average; first cousins share one eighth. Sometimes the person providing the family history may mention a distant relative who is affected with a genetic disorder. In such cases a more extensive pedi- gree may be needed to identify the risk to other family members. For example, a history of a distant maternally related cousin with intellec- tual disability caused by fragile X syndrome can still place a male pro- band at an elevated risk for this disorder. MENDELIAN INHERITANCE There are three classic forms of genetic inheritance: autosomal domi- nant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked; these are referred to as men- delian inheritance forms. Autosomal Dominant Inheritance Autosomal dominant inheritance is determined by the presence of one abnormal gene on one of the autosomes (chromosomes 1-22). Autoso- mal genes exist in pairs, with each parent contributing one copy. In an autosomal dominant trait, a change in one of the paired genes affects the phenotype of an individual, even though the other copy of the gene is functioning correctly. A phenotype can refer to a physical manifesta- tion, a behavioral characteristic, or a difference detectable only through laboratory tests. The pedigree for autosomal dominant disorders demonstrates cer- tain characteristics. These disorders show a vertical transmission (parent-to-child) pattern and can appear in multiple generations (Fig. 97.5). An affected individual has a 50% chance of passing on the delete- rious gene in each pregnancy and, therefore, of having a child affected by the disorder. This is referred to as the recurrence risk for the disor- der. Unaffected individuals (family members who do not manifest the Chapter 97 • Patterns of Genetic Transmission 735 trait and do not harbor a copy of the deleterious gene) do not pass the disorder to their children. Males and females are equally affected. Although not a characteristic per se, the hinding of male-to-male transmission essentially confrms autosomal dominant inheritance. Vertical transmission can also be seen with X-linked traits. However, because a father passes on his Y chromosome to a son, male-to-male transmission cannot be seen with an X-linked trait. Therefore male-to- male transmission eliminates X-linked inheritance as a possible expla- nation. Although male-to-male transmission can occur with Y-linked genes as well, there are very few Y-linked disorders, compared with thousands having the autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Although parent-to-child transmission is a characteristic of auto- somal dominant inheritance, many patients with an autosomal domi- nant disorder have no history of an affected family member, for several possible reasons. First, the patient may have the disorder due to a de novo (new) pathogenic variant that occurred in the DNA of the egg or sperm that formed that individual. Second, many autosomal dominant conditions demonstrate incomplete penetrance, meaning that not all individuals who carry the pathogenic variant have phenotypic mani- festations. In a pedigree, this can appear as a skipped generation, in which an unaffected individual links two affected persons (Fig. 97.6). There are many potential reasons that a disorder might exhibit incom- plete penetrance including the effect of modifier genes, environmental factors, gender, and age. Third, individuals with the same autosomal dominant variant can manifest the disorder to different degrees. This is termed variable expression and is a characteristic of many autosomal Fourth, some spontaneous genetic pathogenic variants occur not in the egg or sperm that forms a child, but rather in a cell in the devel- oping embryo or in a tissue after birth. Such events are referred to as somatic pathogenic variants. Because only a subset of cells in the body are affected, the change is said to be mosaic. The phenotypes caused by a somatic pathogenic variant can vary but are usually milder than if all cells were affected by the pathogenic variant. Some cancers typically arise from cells that have been affected by multiple somatic pathogenic variants. In germline mosaicism, the pathogenic variant occurs in a subset of cells that ultimately produce ova or sperm. An individual who is germline mosaic for a pathogenic variant might not have any manifestations of the associated disorder but may pass that change on to his or her offspring by producing ova or sperm that carry the pathogenic variant. Children whose bodies derive from those ova or sperm will carry the pathogenic variant in all of their cells unless the change undergoes a rare reversion of the somatic pathogenic variant. Recurrence of a dominantly inherited condition to apparently unaf- fected parents can sometimes be explained by germline mosaicism for the dominantly transmitted variant in one of the parents. Autosomal Recessive Inheritance Autosomal recessive inheritance requires deleterious variants in both copies of a gene to cause disease. Examples include cystic fibrosis and sickle cell disease. Autosomal recessive disorders are character- ized by horizontal transmission, the observation of multiple affected members of a kindred in the same generation, but no affected fam- ily members in other generations (Fig. 97.7). They are associated with a recurrence risk of 25% for carrier parents who have had a previ- ous affected child. Male and female offspring are equally likely to be affected, although some traits exhibit differential expression between sexes. The offspring of consanguineous parents are at increased risk for rare, autosomal recessive traits due to the increased chance that both parents may carry a gene affected by a deleterious variant that they inherited from a common ancestor. Consanguinity between parents of a child with a suspected genetic disorder implies, but certainly does not prove, autosomal recessive inheritance. Although consanguineous unions are uncommon in Europe and the Americas, in other parts of the world (southern India, Japan, and the Middle East) as high as 50% of all children may be conceived in consanguineous unions. The risk of a genetic disorder in the offspring of a hrst-cousin union (6-8%) is about double the risk in the general population (3-4%). 

736 Part VIII • Human Genetics Instructions: - Key should contain all information relevant to interpretation of pedigree (e.g., define fill/shading) For clinical (non-published) pedigrees include: a) name of proband/consultand b) family names/initials of relatives for identification, as appropriate c) name and title of person recording pedigree d) historian (person relaying family history information) date of intake/update reason for taking pedigree (e.g., abnormal ultrasound, familial cancer, developmental delay, etc.) ancestry of both sides of family Recommended order of information placed below symbol (or to lower right) a) age; can note year of birth (e.g., b.1978) and/or death (e.g., d. 2007) b) evaluation (see Fig. 97.4) c) pedigree number (e.g., I-1, 1-2, 1-3) Limit identifying information to maintain confidentiality and privacy Male Female Gender not| Comments specified 1. Individual b.1925 30 y 2. Affected individual Assign gender by phenotype (see text for disorders of sex development, etc.). 4 mo Do not write age in symbol. Key/legend used to define shading or other fill (e.g., hatches, dots, etc.). Use only when individual is clinically affected. _------ With ≥2 conditions, the individual's symbol can be partitioned accordingly, each segment shaded with a different fill and defined in legend. 3. Multiple individuals, number known Number of siblings written inside symbol. (Affected individuals should not be grouped.) "n" used in place of "?". 4. Multiple individuals, number unknown or unstated 5. Deceased individuall d. 35 d. 4 mo d. 60's 6. Consultand Indicate cause of death if known. Do not use a cross (t) to indicate death to avoid confusion with evaluation positive (+). Individual(s) seeking genetic counseling/testing. 7. Proband P 8. Stillbirth (SB) An affected family member coming to medical attention independent of other family members. Include gestational age and karyotype, if known. SB 9. Pregnancy (P) Gestational age and karyotype below symbol. Light shading can be used for affected; define in key/legend. Unaffected 4P XV. 207 Pregnancies not carried to term 10. Spontaneous abortion (SAB) 11. Termination of pregnancy (TOP) 12. Ectopic pregnancy (ECT) Affected 17 wks female cystic hygroma 18 wks 47, XY, +18 If gestational age/gender known, write below symbol. Key/legend used to define shading. Write ECT below symbol. ECT Fig. 97.1 Common pedigree symbols, definitions, and abbreviations. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human pedigree nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns. 2008;17:424-433.) 

Chapter 97 • Patterns of Genetic Transmission 737 . Definitions 1. relationship line 3. sibship line 2. line of descent Comments If possible, male partner should be to left of female partner on relationship line. Siblings should be listed from left to right in birth order (oldest to youngest). 4. individual's line 2. Relationship line (horizontal) a. Relationships b. Consanguinity A break in a relationship line indicates the relationship no longer exists. Multiple previous partners do not need to be shown if they do not affect genetic assessment. If degree of relationship not obvious from pedigree, it should be stated (e.g., third cousins) above relationship line. 3. Line of descent (vertical or diagonal). ---------- a. Genetic Biologic parents shown. Multiple gestation Monozygotic Dizygotic --- Unknown Trizygotic The horizontal line indicating monozygosity is placed between the individual's line and not between each symbol. An asterisk (*) can be used if zygosity proven. Family history not available/ known for individual No children by choice or reason unknown Infertility Indicate reason, if known. or vasectom Indicate reason, if known. b. Adoption azoospermia ---- out endometriosis by relative Brackets used for all adoptions. Adoptive and biological parents denoted by dashed and solid lines of descent, respectively. Fig. 97.2 Pedigree line definitions. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human pedigree nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns. 2008;17:424-433.) Every individual probably carries several rare, deleterious recessive pathogenic sequence variants. Because most pathogenic variants car- ried in the general population occur at a very low frequency, it does not make economic sense to screen the entire population to identify the small number of persons who carry these variants. These vari- ants typically remain undetected unless an affected child is born to a couple who both carry pathogenic variants affecting the same gene. However, in some genetic isolates (small populations isolated by geography, religion, culture, or language), certain rare recessive patho- genic variants are much more common than in the general popula- tion. Even though there may be no known consanguinity, couples from these genetic isolates have a greater chance of sharing pathogenic alleles inherited from a common ancestor. Screening programs have been developed among some such groups to detect persons who carry common disease-causing variants and, therefore, are at increased risk for having affected children. A variety of autosomal recessive conditions are more common among Ashkenazi Jews than in the general population. Couples of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry should be offered prenatal or precon- ception screening for Gaucher disease type one (carrier rate 1:14), cystic fibrosis (1:25), Tay-Sachs disease (1:25), familial dysautono- mia (1:30), Canavan disease (1:40), glycogen storage disease type 1A (1:71), maple syrup urine disease (1:81), Fanconi anemia type C (1:89), Niemann-Pick disease type A (1:90), Bloom syndrome (1:100), mucolipidosis IV (1:120), and possibly neonatal familial hyperinsu- linemic hypoglycemia. The prevalence of carriers of certain autosomal recessive variants in some larger populations is unusually high. In such cases, hetero- zygote advantage is postulated. The carrier frequencies of sickle cell disease in the African population and of cystic fibrosis in the north- ern European population are much higher than would be expected from the rate of new pathogenic variants. In these populations, 

738 Part VIII • Human Genetics Instructions: - D represents egg or sperm donor S represents surrogate (gestational carrier) - If the woman is both the ovum donor and a surrogate, in the interest of genetic assessment, she will only be referred to as a donor (e.g., 4 and 5); the pregnancy symbol and its line of descent are positioned below the woman who is carrying the pregnancy - Available family history should be noted on the gamete donor and/or gestational carrier Possible Reproductive Scenarios Comments 1. Sperm donor Couple in which woman is carrying pregnancy using donor sperm. No relationship line is shown between the or woman carrying the pregnancy and the sperm donor. 2. Ovum donor 3. Surrogate only Couple in which woman is carrying pregnancy using a donor egg and partner's sperm. The line of descent from the birth mother is solid because there is a biologic relationship that may affect the fetus (e.g., teratogens). Couple whose gametes are used to impregnate a woman (surrogate) who carries the pregnancy. The line of descent from the surrogate is solid because there is a biological relationship that may affect the fetus (e.g., teratogens). 4. Surrogate ovum donor a) b) ( Couple in which male partner's sperm is used to inseminate (a) an unrelated woman or (b) a sister who is carrying the pregnancy for the couple. or 5. Planned adoption Couple contracts with a woman to carry a preying cy sing wur at the or sperm. Fig. 97.3 Assisted reproductive technology symbols and definitions. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human pedigree nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns. 2008;17:424-433.) heterozygous carriers may have had an advantage in terms of survival and reproduction over noncarriers. In sickle cell disease, the carrier state is thought to confer some resistance to malaria. In cystic fibro- sis, the carrier state has been postulated to confer resistance to chol- era or enteropathogenic Escherichia coli infections. Population-based carrier screening for cystic brosis is recommended for persons of northern European and Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry, and population- based screening for sickle cell disease is recommended for persons of African ancestry. If the frequency of an autosomal recessive disease is known, the fre- quency of the heterozygote or carrier state can be calculated from the Hardy-Weinberg formula: p' + 2pq+ q'=1 where p is the frequency of one of a pair of alleles and q is the fre- quency of the other. For example, if the frequency of cystic fibrosis among White Americans is one in 2,500 (p), then the frequency of the heterozygote (2pq) can be calculated: If p? = 1/2,500, then p = 1/50 and q = 49/50; 2pq = 2 x (1/50) × (49/50) = 98/2,500, or 3.92%. Pseudodominant Inheritance Pseudodominant inheritance refers to the observation of apparent dominant (parent to child) transmission of a known autosomal reces- sive disorder (Fig. 97.8). This occurs when a homozygous affected individual has a partner who is a heterozygous carrier. This is most likely to occur for relatively common recessive traits within a popula- tion, such as sickle cell anemia or nonsyndromic autosomal reces- sive hearing loss caused by deleterious variants in GJB2, the gene that X-Linked Inheritance X-linked inheritance describes the inheritance pattern of most dis- orders caused by deleterious changes in genes located on the X chro- mosome (Fig. 97.9). In X-liked disorders, males are more commonly 

Chapter 97 • Patterns of Genetic Transmission 739 Instructions: •E is used for evaluation to represent clinical and/or test information on the pedigree a. E is to be defined in key/legend b. If more than one evaluation, use subscript (Et, Ez, Es) and define in key c. Test results should be put in parentheses or defined in key/legend • A symbol is shaded only when an individual is clinically symptomatic - For linkage studies, haplotype information is written below the individual. The haplotype of interest should be on left and appropriately highlighted — Repetitive sequences, trinucleotides, and expansion numbers are written with affected allele first and placed in parentheses - If variant known, identify in parentheses Definition Symbol 1. Documented evaluation (*) Scenario Woman with negative echocardiogram. Use only if examined/evaluated by you or your research/clinical team or if the outside evaluation has been reviewed and verified E- (echo) 2. Carrier—not likely to manifest disease regardless of inheritance pattern Male carrier of Tay-Sachs disease by patient report (* not used because results not verified). 3. Asymptomatic/presymptomatic carrier-clinically unaffected at this time but could later exhibit symptoms Woman age 25 with negative mammogram and positive BRCA1 DNA test. 4. Uninformative study (u) 5. Affected individual with positive evaluation (E+) Eu E+ 25 y E, - (mammogram) E2+ (5385insC BRCA1) | Man age 25 with normal physical exam and uninformative DNA test for Huntington disease (E2). 25 У E1 - (physical exam) Ezu (36n/18n) Individual with cystic fibrosis and positive variant study; only one variant has currently been identified. E +(AF508) Eu E + (AF508/u) - - - 10 week male fetus with a trisomy 18 karyotype. 10 wk E+(CVS) | 47,XY, +18 Fig. 97.4 Pedigree symbols of genetic evaluation and testing information. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human pedigree nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns. 2008;17:424 433.) II 5 III 1 2 3 4 5 6 Fig. 97.5 Autosomal dominant pedigree. Pedigree showing typical inheritance of a form of achondroplasia (FGFR3) inherited as an autoso- mal dominant trait. Black, Affected patients. III 2 Fig. 97.6 Incomplete penetrance. This family segregates a familial cancer syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis. Individual 1I.3 is an obligate carrier (arrow), but there are no findings to suggest the dis- order. This disorder is nonpenetrant in this individual. Black, Affected patients. 

740 Part VIII • Human Genetics Fig. 97.7 Autosomal recessive pedigree with parental consanguinity. Central dot, Carriers; Black, affected patients. GJB2 carrier Fig. 97.8 Pseudodominant inheritance. Black, Affected (deaf); central dot shows carrier who is asymptomatic (unaffected). III IV Fig. 97.9 Pedigree demonstrating X-linked recessive inheritance. Central dot, Carriers; black, affected patients. affected than females. Female carriers of these disorders are generally unaffected, or if affected, they are affected more mildly than males. In each pregnancy, female carriers have a 25% chance of having an affected son, a 25% chance of having a carrier daughter, and a 50% chance of having a child that does not inherit the mutated X-linked gene. Because affected males pass their X chromosome to all their daughters and their Y chromosome to all their sons, they have a 50% chance of having a daughter who is a carrier. Male-to-male transmis- sion excludes X-linked inheritance but is seen with autosomal domi- nant and Y-linked inheritance. A female occasionally exhibits signs of an X-linked trait similar to a male. This occurs rarely from homozygosity for an X-linked trait or the presence of a sex chromosome abnormality (45,X or 46,XY female) but more commonly from skewed or nonrandom X-inactivation. X chromosome inactivation occurs early in devel- opment and involves the random and irreversible inactivation of most genes on one X chromosome in female cells (Fig. 97.10). In some cases, a preponderance of cells inactivates the same X chro- mosome, resulting in phenotypic expression of an X-linked patho- genic variant if it resides on the active chromosome. This can occur because of chance, selection against cells that have inactivated the X chromosome carrying the normal gene, or an X chromosome abnormality that results in inactivation of the X chromosome car- rying the normal gene. In some X-linked disorders, both hemizygous males and het- erozygous females who carry an affected X-linked gene have simi- lar phenotypic manifestations. In these cases, an affected male will have a 50% chance of having an affected daughter and a 50% chance of having an unaffected son in each pregnancy, whereas half the male and female offspring of an affected mother will be affected (Fig. 97.11). Some X-linked conditions are lethal in a high per- centage of males, such as incontinentia pigmenti. In such cases the pedigree typically shows only affected females and an overall female/male ratio of 2:1, with an increased number of miscarriages (Fig. 97.12). Y-LINKED INHERITANCE There are few Y-linked traits. These demonstrate only male-to-male transmission, and only males are affected (Fig. 97.13). Most Y-linked genes are related to male sex determination and reproduction and are associated with infertility. Therefore it is rare to see familial transmis- sion of a Y-linked disorder. However, advances in assisted reproductive technologies might make it possible to have familial transmission of male infertility. INHERITANCE ASSOCIATED WITH PSEUDOAUTOSOMAL REGIONS There are pseudoautosomal regions on the X and Y chromosomes. Because these regions are made up of homologous sequences of nucleotides, genes that are located in these regions are present in equal numbers among both males and females. SHOX is one of the best-characterized disease genes located in these regions. Heterozy- gous SHOX pathogenic variants cause Leri-Weil dyschondrosteosis, a rare skeletal dysplasia that involves bilateral bowing of the forearms with dislocations of the ulna at the wrist and generalized short stature. Homozygous SHOX pathogenic variants cause the much more severe Langer mesomelic dwarfism. DIGENIC INHERITANCE Digenic inheritance explains the occasional occurrence of retinitis pigmentosa (RP) in children of parents who each carry a pathogenic variant in a different RP-associated gene (Fig. 97.14). Both parents have normal vision, as would be expected, but their offspring who are double heterozygotes-having inherited both variants- develop RP. Digenic pedigrees can exhibit characteristics of both autosomal dominant (vertical transmission) and autosomal recessive inheri- tance (one in four recurrence risk). A couple in which the two unaf- fected partners are carriers for variants in two different RP-associated genes that show digenic inheritance have a one in four risk of hav- ing an affected child, similar to what is seen in autosomal recessive inheritance. However, their affected children, and affected children in subsequent generations, have a one in four risk of transmitting both variants to their offspring, who would be affected (vertical transmission). PSEUDOGENETIC INHERITANCE AND FAMILIAL CLUSTERING Sometimes nongenetic causes of a particular disease in multiple fam- ily members can produce a pattern that mimics genetic transmission. These nongenetic factors can include identifiable environmental fac- tors, teratogenic exposures, or undetermined or undefined factors. 

Chapter 97 • Patterns of Genetic Transmission 741 X,Хр X]X. Х Хр X,X. Х„X, X"X, X"X, X..Xp XX. X,×p X"X. X,X. X"X. X..X. XX. Fig. 97.10 X-inactivation. Black marks the active X chromosome. Color of the cell represents its active X chromosome is paternally (X,, blue) or maternally (Xm. pink) derived. IV 0 000 Fig. 97.11 Pedigree pattern demonstrating X-linked dominant inher- itance. Black, Affected patients. Note there is no father-to-son transmis- sion in this situation, and hemizygosity (i.e., X-linked gene in a male) is not lethal. In some X-linked dominant conditions, X-linked males have a more severe phenotype and might not survive. In that case, only females manifest the disease (see Fig. 97.12). Fig. 97.12 Pedigree of an X-linked dominant disorder with male lethality, such as incontinentia pigmenti. Black, Affected patients. Examples of identifiable factors might include multiple siblings in a family having asthma because of exposure to cigarette smoke from their parents or having failure to thrive, developmental delay, and unusual facial appearance caused by exposure to alcohol during pregnancy. In some cases, the disease is sufficiently common in the general population that some familial clustering occurs simply by chance. Breast cancer affects 11% of all women, and it is possible that several women in a family will develop breast cancer even in the absence of a specific genetic predisposition. However, hereditary breast cancer associated with pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 should be suspected in any individual who has a personal history of breast can- cer with onset before age 50, early-onset breast and ovarian cancer at any age, bilateral or multifocal breast cancer, a family history of breast cancer or breast and ovarian cancer consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance, or a personal or family history of male breast Fig. 97.13 Y-linked inheritance. Black, Affected patients. 

742 Part VIII • Human Genetics Aa BB AA Bb AA BB Aa BB AA Bb Aa Bb AA BB Aa Bb Aa BB AA Bb AA BB Fig. 97.14 Digenic pedigree. Here, the disease alleles are a and b the they reside on distinity for vati lot a resis. o games 50/ato have required. Black, Affected patients. Fig. 97.15 Pedigree of a mitochondrial disorder, exhibiting maternal inheritance. Black, Affected patients. cancer. In other cases, clustering within a family may be caused by undefined genetic factors or unidentified pathogenic sequence vari- ants (nuclear or mitochondrial). NONTRADITIONAL INHERITANCE Some genetic disorders are inherited in a manner that does not fol- low classical mendelian patterns. Nontraditional inheritance is seen in mitochondrial disorders, triplet repeat expansion diseases, and imprinting defects. Mitochondrial Inheritance An individual's mitochondrial genome is entirely derived from the mother because sperm contain relatively few mitochondria, which are degraded after fertilization. It follows that mitochondrial inheri- tance is, essentially, maternal inheritance. A female with a mito- chondrially inherited genetic disorder can have affected offspring of either sex, but an affected father cannot pass on the disease to his off- spring (Fig. 97.15). Mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants are often deletions or point pathogenic variants. Overall, one person in 400 has a maternally inherited pathogenic mitochondrial DNA patho- genic variant (see Chapter 108). In individual families, mitochondrial inheritance may be difficult to distinguish from autosomal dominant or X-linked inheritance, but in many cases, the sex of the transmit- ting and nontransmitting parents can suggest a mitochondrial basis Mitochondria are the cell's suppliers of energy; the organs that are most affected by the presence of abnormal mitochondria are those that have the greatest energy requirements, such as the brain, muscle, heart, and liver (see Chapters 107.4, 409, 638.2, and 651.4; Fig. 97.16). Common manifestations include developmental delay, seizures, car- diac dysfunction, decreased muscle strength and tone, and hearing and vision problems. Mitochondrial diseases can be highly variable in their clinical manifestations. This is partly because cells can contain multiple mitochondria, each bearing several copies of the mitochondrial genome. Thus a cell can have a mixture of normal and abnormal mitochondrial genomes, which is referred to as heteroplasmy. In contrast, homoplasmy refers to a state in which all copies of the mitochondrial genome carry the same sequence variant. Unequal segregation of mitochondria carrying normal and abnormal genomes and replicative advantage can result in varying degrees of heteroplasmy in the cells of an affected individual, including the individual ova of an affected female. Because of this, a mother may be asymptomatic and yet have children who are severely affected. The level of heteroplasmy at which disease symptoms typically appear can also vary based on the type of mitochondrial Detection of variants in the mitochondrial genome may require sampling of the affected tissue for DNA analysis. In some tissues, such as blood, testing for mitochondrial DNA variants may be inadequate because the variant may be found primarily in affected tissues such as muscle (Fig. 97.17). Growth and differentiation factor 15 (GDF-15) and blood lactate levels are screening tests for mitochondrial disorders. GDF-15 is only accurate in children ≥1 year of age and in the absence of heart, liver, or renal disease. Triplet Repeat Expansion Disorders Triplet repeat expansion disorders are distinguished by the special dynamic nature of the disease-causing variant. Triplet repeat expan- sion disorders include fragile X syndrome, myotonic dystrophy, Huntington disease, and spinocerebellar ataxias (Table 97.2 and Fig. 97.18). These disorders are caused by expansion in the num- ber of 3-bp repeats. The fragile X gene, FMR1, normally has 5-40 CGG triplets. An error in replication can result in expansion of that number to a level in the gray zone between 41 and 58 repeats or to a level referred to as a prepathogenic variant, which comprises 59- 200 repeats. Some prepathogenic variant carriers, more often males, develop fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) as adults. Female prepathogenic variant carriers are at risk for frag- primary ovarian insufficiency (FXPOI). Persons, especially females, with a prepathogenic variant are also at risk for having the repeat expand further in subsequent meiosis, thus cross- ing into the range of a full pathogenic variant (>200 repeats) in offspring. With this number of repeats, the FMRi gene becomes hypermethylated, and protein production is lost. Some triplet expansions associated with other genes can cause disease through a mechanism other than decreased protein produc- tion. In Huntington disease, the expansion causes the gene prod- uct to have a new, toxic effect on the neurons of the basal ganglia. For most triplet repeat disorders, there is a clinical correlation to the size of the expansion, with a greater expansion causing more severe symptoms and having an earlier age of disease onset. The observation of increasing severity of disease and early age at onset in subsequent generations is termed genetic anticipation and is a defining characteristic of many triplet repeat expansion disorders Genetic Imprinting The two copies of most autosomal genes are functionally equivalent. However, in some cases, only one copy of a gene is transcribed, and the second copy is silenced. This gene silencing is typically associ- ated with methylation of DNA, which is an epigenetic modifica- tion; it does not change the nucleotide sequence of the DNA (Fig. 97.20). In imprinting, gene expression depends on the parent of origin of the chromosome (see Chapter 99.7). Imprinting disorders result from an imbalance of active copies of a given gene, which can occur for several reasons. Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes, 

Chapter 97 • Patterns of Genetic Transmission 743 Table 97.1 Representative Examples of Disorders Caused by Pathogenic Variants in Mitochondrial DNA and Their Inheritance DISEASE PHENOTYPE MORANTEN MENTA THOLEENLE HOMOPLASMY vs HETEROPLASMY INHERITANCE Leber hereditary Rapid optic nerve atrophy, leading Substitution p.Arg340His in ND1 Homoplasmic (usually) Maternal optic neuropathy to blindness in young adult life; gene of complex I of electron sex bias approximately 50% males with visual loss, only 10% traisone paino genic carialex females NARP, Leigh Neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis Point pathogenic variants in ATPase Heteroplasmic Maternal disease pigmentosa, developmental subunit six gene delay, intellectual disability lactic academia MELAS Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, Point pathogenic variant in tRNALeu Heteroplasmic Maternal lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes; may manifest only as diabetes mellitus or deafness MERRF Myoclonic epilepsy, ragged red Point pathogenic variant in tRNALys Heteroplasmic Maternal fibers in muscle, ataxia, sensorineural deafness Deafness Progressive sensorineural m. 1555A>G pathogenic variant in Homoplasmic Maternal deafness, often induced by 12S RNA aminoglycoside antibiotics Nonsyndromic sensorineural m.7445A>G pathogenic variant in Homoplasmic Maternal deafness 12S rRNA Chronic progressive Progressive weakness of extraocular The common MELAS point Heteroplasmic Maternal if external muscles, cardiomyopathy, point (chthamoplegia ptosis, heart block, ataxia, retinal pathogenic pigmentation, diabetes variants Pearson syndrome Pancreatic insufficiency, Large deletions Heteroplasmic Sporadic, pancytopenia, lactic acidosis somatic pathogenic variants Kearns-Sayre PEO of early onset with heart 5-kb large deletion Heteroplasmic Sporadic, syndrome (KSS) block, retinal pigmentation somatic pathogenic variants mtDNA, Mitochondrial DNA; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; tRNA, transfer RNA. From Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF, eds. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001: p. 246. two distinct disorders associated with developmental impairment, are caused by microdeletions of chromosome 15q11-12. The micro- deletion in Prader-Willi syndrome is always on the paternally derived chromosome 15, whereas in Angelman syndrome it is on the maternal copy. UBE3A is the gene responsible for Angelman syndrome. The paternal copy of UBE3A is transcriptionally silenced in the brain, but the maternal copy continues to be transcribed. If an individual has a maternally derived deletion, an insufficient amount of UBE3A protein is produced in the brain, resulting in the neuro- logic deficits seen in Angelman syndrome. Uniparental disomy (UPD), the rare occurrence of a child inheriting both copies of a chromosome from the same parent, is another genetic mechanism that can cause Prader-Willi and Angel- man syndromes. Inheriting both chromosomes 15 from the mother is functionally the same as deletion of the paternal 15q12 region and results in Prader-Willi syndrome. Approximately 30% of cases of Prader-Willi syndrome are caused by maternal UPD15, whereas paternal UPD15 accounts for only 3% of Angelman syndrome (see Chapter 99.7). Pathogenic variants in UBE3A account for ~11% of patients with Angelman syndrome and result in familial transmis- sion. The least common cause is a pathogenic variant affecting the imprinting center, which results in an inability to correctly imprint UBE3A. In a mother, inability to reset the imprinting on her pater- nally inherited chromosome 15 imprint results in a 50% risk of passing on an incorrectly methylated copy of UBE3A to a child, who would then develop Angelman syndrome. Other imprinted regions of clinical interest include the short arm of chromosome 11, where the genes for Beckwith-Wiedemann syn- drome and nesidioblastosis map, and the long arm of chromosome seven with maternal UPD of 7q being associated with some cases of idiopathic short stature and Russell-Silver syndrome. Imprinting of a gene can occur during gametogenesis or early embryonic development (reprogramming). Genes can become inactive or active by various mechanisms including DNA methyla- tion or demethylation or histone acetylation or deacetylation, with different patterns of (de)methylation noted on paternal or mater- nal imprintable chromosome regions. Some genes demonstrate tissue-specific imprinting (see Fig. 97.20). There is a small but increased incidence of imprinting disorders, specifically Beckwith- Wiedemann and Angelman syndrome, following assisted reproduc- tive technologies such as in vitro fertilization and intracytoplasmic sperm injection. The overall incidence of these disorders in chil- dren conceived using assisted reproductive technologies is likely to be <1%. 

744 Part VIII • Human Genetics Central nervous system Encephalopathy Seizures and demenia Psychosis and depression Ataxia Migraine Cardiac Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Dilated cardiomyopathy Heart block Pre-excitation syndrome Renal Renal tubular defects Fanconi syndrome Eye External ophthalmoplegia Ptosis Cataract Pigmentary retinopathy Optic atrophy Hearing Bilateral sensorineural deafness Gastrointestinal Dysphagia Pseudo-obstruction Constipation Hepatic failure Endocrine and diabetes Diabetes mellitus Hypoparathyroidism Hypothyroidism Gonadal failure Peripheral nervous system Myopathy Axonal sensorimotor neuropathy Fig. 97.16 The range of affected tissues and clinical phenotypes associated with pathogenic variants in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). (Modified from Chinnery PF, Turnbull DM. Mitochondrial DNA and disease. Lancet. 1999;345:5117-S|21.) MULTIFACTORIAL AND POLYGENIC INHERITANCE Multifactorial inheritance refers to traits that are caused by a com- bination of inherited, environmental, and stochastic factors (Fig. 97.21). Multifactorial traits differ from polygenic inheritance, which refers to traits that result from the additive effects of multiple genes. Multifactorial traits segregate within families but do not exhibit a consistent or recognizable inheritance pattern. Characteristics include the following: • There is a similar rate of recurrence among all first-degree relatives (parents, siblings, offspring of affected child). It is unusual to find a substantial increase in risk for relatives related more distantly than second degree to the index case. : Some disorders have sex predie tie in as lendicat they an unequal male:female incidence. Pyloric stenosis, for example, is more com- mon in males, whereas congenital dislocation of the hips is more common in females. With an altered sex ratio, the risk is higher for the relatives of an index case whose gender is less often affected than relatives of an index case of the more frequently affected gender. The risk to the son of an affected female with infantile pyloric stenosis is 18%, compared with the 5% risk for the son of an affected male. An affected female presumably has a greater genetic susceptibility, which can be passed on to offspring. • The likelihood that both identical twins will be affected with the same malformation is < 100% but much greater than the chance that both members of a nonidentical twin pair will be affected. This con- trasts with the pattern seen in mendelian inheritance, in which iden- tical twins almost always share fully penetrant genetic disorders. • The risk of recurrence is increased when multiple family members are affected. A simple example is that the risk of recurrence for uni- lateral cleft lip and palate is 4% for a couple with one affected child and increases to 9% with two affected children. It is sometimes dif- ficult to distinguish between a multifactorial and mendelian etiology in families with multiple affected individuals. • The risk of recurrence may be greater when the disorder is more severe. For example, an infant who has long-segment Hirschsprung disease has a greater chance of having an affected sibling than the infant who has short-segment Hirschsprung disease. There are two types of multifactorial traits. One exhibits continuous variation, with "normal" individuals falling within a statistical range— often defined as having a value two standard deviations (SDs) above and/or below the mean—and "abnormals" falling outside that range. Examples include such traits as intelligence, blood pressure, height, and head circumference. For many of these traits, offspring values can be estimated based on a modified average of their parental values, with nutritional and environmental factors playing an important role. 

Chapter 97 • Patterns of Genetic Transmission 745 Patients with clinical suspicion of mitochondrial RC disorders Common mtDNA variants positive J Y negative Blood •Determine heteroplasmy •Family member studies Leigh Myopathy Encephalo- MNGIE Cardiomyopathy • TK2 •ANT1 •PDH •COX assembly genes •CI subunits •Cl assembly genes •SCO2 •ANT1 • TP Encephalo- and/or Hepatopathy • DGUOK •COX10 • POLG •MPV17 •SCO1 •BCS1L • SUCLA2 Encephalo- Nephropathy Intractable PEO ,Seizures •POLG • PATA •TWINKLE Muscle, Liver, or Skin positive y negative muscle, liver, skin •Family member studies ETC Proliferated Not Deficient negative mtDNA content negative positive Generalized Complex Deficiency •Depletion genes •PDH Isolated Complex Deficiency high or normal depletion • POLG •mtDNA tRNA genes •Mito genome sequencing •mtDNA deletions by PCR negative Cannot confirm diagnosis negative •Sequence complex subunits •Sequence assembly genes •mtDNA tRNA genes •Mito genome sequencing negative •TWINKLE • ANT1 •MPV17 • SUCLA2 positive positive positive •Family member studies gastrointestinal encephalopathy; PEO, progressive external ophthalmoplegia; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; Cl, respiratory complex l; ETC, elec- tron transport chain; PCR, polymerase chain reaction. (From Haas RH, Parikh S, Falk MJ, et al. The in-depth evaluation of suspected mitochondrial Table 97.2 Diseases Associated with Polynucleotide Repeat Expansions DISEASE CATEGORY 1 Huntington disease Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy DESCRIPTION REPEAT SEQUENCE NORMAL RANGE ABNORMAL RANGE PARENT IN WHOM EXPANSION LOCATION OF USUALLY OCCURS EXPANSION Loss of motor control, dementia, affective disorder Adult-onset motor-neuron disease associated with androgen insensitivity Progressive ataxia, dysarthria, dysmetria Progressive ataxia, dysarthria CAG 6-34 36-100 or more CAG 11-34 40-62 More often through father More often through father Exon Exon Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 Spinocerebellar ataxia type three (Machado-Joseph disease) CAG 6-39 41-81 More often through father Exon CAG 15-29 35-59 Exon Dystonia, distal muscular atrophy, ataxia, external ophthalmoplegia CAG 13-36 68-79 More often through father Exon Continued 

746 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 97.2 Diseases Associated with Polynucleotide Repeat Expansions-cont'd REPEAT NORMAL DISEASE DESCRIPTION SEQUENCE RANGE CATEGORY 1 Spinocerebellar Progressive ataxia, dysarthria, CAG 4-16 ataxia type 6 nystagmus Spinocerebellar Progressive ataxia, dysarthria, CAG 7-35 ataxia type 7 retinal degeneration Spinca robellr Progressive ataxia, dementia, CAG 29-42 bradykinesia, dysmetria Dentatorubral- Cerebellar atrophy, ataxia, CAG 7-25 pallidoluysian myoclonic epilepsy, atrophy/Haw choreoathetosis, dementia River syndrome CATEGORY 2 Pseudoachondro- Short stature, joint laxity, GAC plasia, multiple degenerative joint disease 5 epiphyseal dysplasia Oculopharyngeal Proximal limb weakness, GCG muscular 6 dysphagia, ptosis dystrophy Cleidocranial dysplasia GCG, GCT, GCA 17 Synpolydactyly Short stature, open skull sutures with bulging calvaria, clavicular hypoplasia, shortened fingers, dental anomalies Polydactyly and syndactyly CATEGORY 3 Myotonic dystrophy (DM1; chromosome 19) Muscle loss, cardiac arrhythmia, cataracts, frontal balding Myotonic dystrophy (DM2; chromosome 3) Friedreich ataxia Muscle loss, cardiac arrhythmia, cataracts, frontal balding Progressive limb ataxia, dysarthria, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, pyramidal weakness in legs Fragile X syndrome Intellectual impairment, (FRAXA) large ears and jaws, macroorchidism in males Fragile site (FRAXE) Mild intellectual impairment Spinocerebellar ataxia type 8 Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 Spinocerebellar ataxia type 12 Adult-onset ataxia, dysarthria, nystagmus Ataxia and seizures Ataxia, eye movement disorders; variable age at onset Juvenile-onset seizures, myoclonus, dementia GCG, GCT, GCA CTG CCTG GAA CGG GCC CTG ATTCT CAG Progressive myoclonic epilepsy type 1 12-bp repeat motif 15 5-37 <75 7-2 6-52 6-35 16-37 12-16 7-28 2-3 From Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ, White, RL. Medical Genetics, 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2006: p. 82. ABNORMAL RANGE 21-27 38-200 47-55 49-88 6-7 7-13 27 (expansion observed in one family) 22-25 100 to several thousand 75-11,000 200-900 or more 200-2,000 or more >200 107-127 800-4,500 66-78 30-75 PARENT IN WHOM EXPANSION USUALLY OCCURS LOCATION OF EXPANSION - More often through father More often through father - Either parent, but expansion to congenital form through mother Autosomal recessive inheritance, so disease alleles are inherited from both parents Exclusively through mother Exon - Exon Exon Exon Exon Exon Exon 3' untranslated region 3' untranslated region Intron 5' untranslated region More often through 5' untranslated mother region More often through 3' untranslated mother region More often through Intron father 5' untranslated region Autosomal recessive inheritance, so transmitted by both parents 5' untranslated region 

Chapter 97 • Patterns of Genetic Transmission 747 pre-mRNA , AUG 59 59 UTR (CGG)n intron (GAA)n (CCUG)n exon (CAG)n (CGG)n>200 Fragile X syndrome (CGG) 60 to 200 Fragile X tremor/ataxia syndrome (GAA)n≥200 Friedreich ataxia (CCTG)n275 Myotonic dystrophy 2 (CAG)n≥40 Huntington disease Transcriptional silencing = loss-of- function variant 2 to 5-fold increase in FMR1 mRNA = ? gain-of- RNA function Impaired transcriptional elongation = loss of frataxin function Expanded polyglutamine tracts in the huntingtin protein confer novel properties on the protein stop intron 39 UTR (CUG)n 39 (CTG)n≥50 Myotonic dystrophy 1 -P-- Expanded CUG repeats in the RNA confer novel properties on the RNA Loss of RNA binding = impaired translational repression of target RNAS Neuronal intranuclear inclusions Increased Fe in mitochondria, reduced heme synthesis, Increased and/or promiscuous protein:protein interactions with transcription factors → loss of their function reduced activity Expanded CUG repeats bind increased amounts of RNA-binding proteins → impaired RNA splicing of key proteins of Fe-S complex containing proteins Fig. 97.18 The locations of the trinucleotide repeat expansions and the sequence of each trinucleotide in five representative trinucleotide repeat diseases, shown on a schematic of a generic pre-messenger RNA (mRNA). The minimal number of repeats in the DNA sequence of the affected gene associated with the disease is also indicated, as well as the effect of the expansion on the mutant RNA or protein. (From Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF, eds. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016; based partly on an unpublished figure from John A. Phillips Ill, Vanderbilt University.) 55 yr ТоБ. 50 yr 40 yr Fig. 97.19 Myotonic dystrophy pedigree illustrating genetic anticipation. In this case the age at onset for family members affected with an autoso- mal dominant disease is lower in more recent generations. Black, Affected patients. 

748 Part VIII • Human Genetics IT PHR 40 MA T С 1 99,9 mi, C 8 99,9 G m mg, 119 PAM T C 19 98,80 T T Individual I A 1º 99,99 C 19 99,1 Individual Il Fig. 97.20 Tissue-specific DNA methylation and epigenetic heterogeneity among individuals. A subset of the DNA methylation patterns within a cell is characteristic of that cell type. Cell type-specific and tissue-specific DNA methylation patterns are illustrated by organ-to-organ variations in the clusters of methylated cytosine-phosphate-guanine bases (CpGs) within the same individual. Despite overall consistency in tissue-specific DNA methylation patterns, variations in these patterns exist among different individuals. Methylated CpGs are indicated by a filled circle and unmethyl- ated CoGs by an open circle. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are indicated by the corresponding base. (Redrawn from Brena RM, Huang THM, Plass C. Toward a human epigenome. Nat Genet. 2006;38:1359-1360.) Genetic load Nature vs nurture ¡Genetic dominant fully penetrant Incompletely penetrant Polygenic Multifactorial Environmentall With other multifactorial traits, the distinction between normal and abnormal is based on the qualitative presence or absence of a particu- lar trait. Examples include pyloric stenosis, neural tube defects, con- genital heart defects, and cleft lip and cleft palate. Such traits follow a threshold model (see Fig. 97.15). A distribution of liability because of genetic and nongenetic factors is postulated in the population. Indi- viduals who exceed a threshold liability develop the trait, and those below the threshold do not. The balance between genetic and environmental factors is demon- strated by neural tube detects. Genetic factors are implicated by the recurrence risk for parents of an affected child compared with the general population, yet the recurrence risk is about 3%, less than what would be expected if the trait was caused by a single, fully penetrant pathogenic variant. The role of nongenetic environmental factors is shown by the recurrence risk decreasing up to 87% if the mother-to-be takes 4 mg of folic acid daily starting 3 months before Environmental effect Fig. 97.21 The progressive decrease in the genetic load contribut- ing to the development of a disease creates a smooth transition in the distribution of illnesses on an etiologic diagram. In theory, no dis- eases are completely free from the influence of both genetic and en- vironmental factors. (From Bomprezzi R, Kovanen PE, Martin R. New approaches to investigating heterogeneity in complex traits. J Med Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Chapter 98 Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice Brendan Lee and Nicola Brunetti-Pierri Genetic testing involves analyzing genetic material to obtain informa- tion related to a person's health status using chromosomal (cytoge- netic) analysis (see Chapter 99) and nucleic acid (primarily DNA but also RNA)-based testing. DIAGNOSTIC TESTING Diagnostic genetic testing helps to aggregate a set of signs and symp- toms (phenotype) for disease diagnosis. The list of disorders for which specific genetic tests are available is extensive and growing. The website http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr/ provides one database of reported available tests. Single-gene disorders can be tested by at least three different approaches: linkage analysis (a classical approach now rarely used), chromosome microarray (CMA), and direct pathogenic variant analysis, usually by DNA sequencing (Table 98.1). Linkage analysis is used if the responsible gene is mapped but not yet identified, or if it is impracti- cal to find specific pathogenic variants, usually because of the large size and large number of different pathogenic variants in some genes. CMA can be used to detect large, multigene deletions or duplications (copy number variations, or CNVs). In addition, with increasing resolu- tion, single-gene or smaller intragenic deletions or duplications can be detected by CMA, although it is important to note that coverage of each gene varies by array type used. Direct DNA pathogenic variant identifica- tion is readily available with the advent of the complete human genome sequence next-generation sequencing (NGS) tools. We also recognize the relatively frequent co-occurrence of multiple disorders, each caused by distinct pathogenic variants, in patients with complex or "blended" fea- tures. This may include partial to minimal clinical manifestations in a substantial percentage of individuals harboring pathogenic variants in known disease genes that remain undiagnosed. The ability to simultane- ously sequence hundreds to thousands of genes (via NGS approaches) has provided insight into this complexity of disease pathogenesis. Linkage testing involves tracking a genetic trait through a family using closely linked polymorphic markers as a surrogate for the trait Chapter 98 • Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice 749 (Fig. 98.1). It requires testing an extended family and is vulnerable to several pitfalls, such as genetic recombination, genetic heterogeneity, and incorrect diagnosis in the proband or family member. Genetic recombination occurs between any pair of loci, with the frequency being proportional to the distance between them. This problem is min- imized using very closely linked markers and, if possible, using markers that flank the specific gene. Genetic heterogeneity can be problematic for a linkage-based test if there are multiple distinct genomic loci that can cause the same phenotype, resulting in the risk that the locus tested for is not the one responsible for disease in the family. Incorrect diag- nosis in the proband also leads to tracking the wrong gene. Linkage testing remains useful for several genetic conditions, but it has been superseded by the availability of DNA sequencing of either single gene, panel, or exome sequencing. CMAs can detect CNVs in a patient's DNA (see Chapter 99). CMA provides a level of genetic resolution between that available with DNA sequencing (single nucleotide) and that available with chromosome analysis (~5 million base pairs). CMA can resolve deletions or dupli- cations of several kilobases within one gene. In theory, this approach can detect deletion and duplication pathogenic variants that would be missed by either chromosome analysis or direct pathogenic vari- ant testing by DNA sequencing. However, because the specific resolu- tion and coverage of different CMA platforms can vary tremendously for different gene regions, the sensitivity for detecting deletions and duplications can vary for different diseases and laboratories. The high- est resolution used is detection of a deletion or duplication at the single exon level. Direct DNA-based pathogenic variant testing avoids the pitfalls of linkage testing by detecting the specific gene pathogenic variant i.e., sequence change). The specitc approach used is customized to the biology of the gene being tested. In some disorders, one or a few distinct pathogenic variants occur in all affected individuals and a spe- cific assay for that variant could be used. This is the case in sickle cell anemia, in which the same single-base substitution occurs in every- one with the disorder. In other conditions, many possible pathogenic variants may account for the disorder in different individuals. In cystic fibrosis, for example, ›1,000 distinct pathogenic variants have been found in the CFTR gene. Pathogenic variant analysis is challenging because no single technique can detect all possible pathogenic variants (eg., single nucleotide variation [SNV]), small (several nucleotide) insertion-deletions ("indels"), CNV (larger deletion or duplications), complex structural variations (e.g., translocations, inversions, etc.), DNA repeat expansions (e.g., variable repeat expansions), and epi- genetic alterations (e.g., changes in DNA methylation without chang- ing the underlying DNA sequence). However, with high-throughput DNA sequencing technology, the most frequently used approach is to Table 98.1 TYPE OF TESTING Linkage analysis Approaches for Genetic Testing RESOLUTION Depends on location of polymorphic markers near putative disease gene ADVANTAGES Chromosome microarray (CMA) Direct DNA-based testing (e.g., DNA sequencing) Several hundred base paindreds of kilobases Single-base-pair changes Able to detect small deletion or duplications within one or more genes pathogenic variant is DISADVANTAGES Can give only diagnostic fireliaboid of genetic recombination between presumed DNA pathogenic variant and polymorphic markers Can miss small deletions or insertions depending on the resolution of the array used duplication of a segment of gene SAMPLE REQUIREMENTS Requires mutials with Single patient sample sufficient, but having sample from biological parents can help with interpretation Single patient sample sufficient, but having sample from biologica parents and siblings (affected or unaffected) can help with interpretation 

750 Part VIII • Human Genetics 0 32 3 2 2 : 1 42 Disease gene B fetus 1 3 22 2 Fig. 98.1 Use of linkage analysis in prenatal diagnosis of an autoso- mal recessive disorder. Both parents are carriers, and they have one affected son. The numbers below the symbols indicate alleles at three polymorphic loci: A, B, and C. Locus B resides within the disease gene. The affected son inherited the 1-2-2 chromosome from his father and the 2-1-2 chromosome from his mother. The fetus has inherited the same chromosome from the father but the 3-2-4 chromosome from the mother and therefore is most likely to be a carrier. directly sequence DNA segments "captured" and amplified from DNA isolated from peripheral blood white blood cells. The limitation of this approach is that only amplified DNA segments are sequenced and are usually restricted to the coding exonic regions of a gene. Because patho- genic variants sometimes occur in the noncoding and intronic regions, failure to detect a pathogenic variant does not fully exclude the diagno- sis. In addition, deleted genes or regions may not be detected. NGS tests panels of genes that target disease symptoms (e.g., epilepsy, brain malformations, sensorineural deafness, or skeletal dysplasias) or the majority of the exome (exome sequencing). Genome sequencing, where both coding and noncoding sequences are sequenced, can pro- vide even more information. However, clinical interpretation is limited predominantly to the coding sequences of the approximately 20,000 human genes, the "digital exome," as it is extracted electronically from genome data. Genome sequencing, compared with exome sequencing, also has the advantage of providing improved detection of CNV, struc- tural variation, and repeat expansions, although this is highly depen- dent on the bioinformatics algorithms used in interpretation. With NGS, the challenge is the interpretation of enormous genetic variation within a single individual. Direct sequencing of tens to hundreds of genes in NGS panels offers a potentially higher sensitiv- ity because the "depth" of read is higher without complicating high discovery rate of variants of unknown sequences (VUS) (Fig. 98.2). Exome and genome sequencing also offer the potential for identifying new disease-gene associations as well as the ability to detect clinical presentations caused by more than one altered gene (i.e., oligogenic phenotypes). An important ethical consideration is the reporting of incidental findings, whether medically actionable or not medically actionable in a patient. For example, exome and genome sequencing may identify pathogenic variants that cause aminoglycoside-sensitive hearing loss, which would be medically actionable but unrelated to the primary indication for which the test was ordered. At the same time, the dis- covery of apolipoprotein E variants in a child that increase Alzheimer disease risk susceptibility would not typically be medically actionable. Therefore counseling for patients undergoing these tests is important so that only requested results are reported back to the patient. Guidelines continue to evolve for reporting of incidental findings from exome and genome sequencing by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (www.acmg.net). Practice and recommendations continue to vary among international genetic organizations revealing incidental findings to patients, and many strongly advocate the engagement of the patient and family in the decision. Some groups require revealing to the patient and/or family significant diseases (actionable) with a spe- cific and successful treatment or prevention strategy (Table 98.2). Genetic testing is interpreted by three factors: analytic validity, clini- cal validity, and clinical utility. Analytical validity is test accuracy: Does the test correctly detect the presence or absence of pathogenic variant? Most genetic tests have a very high analytical validity assuming human error has not occurred. Human errors are possible, and unlike most medical tests, a genetic test is unlikely to be repeated because it is assumed that the result will not change over time. Therefore human errors can go undetected for long periods of time. In addition, variants may be reinterpreted over time as our knowledge base of disease-causing pathogenic variants and genes increases. Clinical validity is the degree to which the test correctly predicts presence or absence of disease. False-positive and false-negative test results can occur. False-positive results are more likely for predic- tive tests than for diagnostic tests. An important contributing fac- tor is nonpenetrance, where an individual with an at-risk genotype might not clinically express the condition. Another factor is the find- ing of a VUS. Detection of a base sequence variation in an affected patient does not prove that it is the cause of the patients disorder. Exome sequencing of an individual may identify more than 30,000 VUS and more than 3,000,000 VUS for genome sequencing. Various lines of evidence are used to establish pathogenicity. These include the absence of the variant in large populations of control individuals, finding the variant in affected individuals, demonstration or inter- ence that the variant alters the function of the gene product, noting that the amino acid altered by the pathogenic variant is conserved in evolution, and segregation of the variant with disease in a fam- ily. For many variants, it is possible to be certain whether the vari- ant is pathogenic or benign, but for others it might be impossible to definitively assign causality or noncontribution with 100% confi- dence. For these reasons, they are noted as VUS. Notably, interpreta- tion of pathogenicity for a specific VUS may change over time as our knowledge base increases, underscoring the importance of counseling and reinterpretation. False-negative results reflect an inability to detect a pathogenic variant in an affected patient. This occurs principally in disorders with genetic heterogeneity-allelic (different pathogenic variants occur in one causative gene) or locus (>1 gene can cause a disease) heterogeneity. It is often difficult to detect all possible pathogenic variants within a gene because pathogenic variants vary, both in loca- tion within the gene and in the type of variant. Direct sequencing can miss gene deletions or rearrangements (i.e., structural variants), and pathogenic variants may be found within noncoding sequences such as introns or promoter. Therefore a negative DNA test does not neces- sarily exclude a diagnosis. Clinical utility is the degree to which the results of a test guide clini- cal management. For genetic testing, clinical utility includes establish- ing a diagnosis that obviates the need for additional workup or guiding surveillance or treatment. Test results may also be used as a basis for genetic counseling. For some disorders, genetic testing is possible, but the test results do not add to the clinical assessment. If the diagnosis and genetic implications are already clear, it might not be necessary to pursue genetic testing. Predictive genetic testing involves performing a test in a person at risk for developing a genetic disorder (presymptomatic), usually on the basis of family history, yet who does not manifest signs or symptoms. This is usually done for disorders that display age-dependent penetrance (e.g., the likelihood of manifesting signs and symptoms increases with age, as in cancer genetic syndromes or Huntington disease). A major caution with predictive testing is that the presence of a gene pathogenic variant does not necessarily mean that the disease will develop. Many of the disorders with age-dependent penetrance display incomplete penetrance. A person who inherits a pathogenic variant may never develop signs of the disorder. There is concern that a posi- tive DNA test could result in stigmatization of the person and might not provide information that will guide medical management. Stig- matization might include psychologic stress, but it could also include 

Chapter 98 • Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice 751 Specimen Nucleic acid extraction DNA or RNA Library preparation Next-gen > sequencing Raw data processing Variant calling 1. Blood or other tissue 2. Germ line or somatic (eg, tumor) 1. Target enrichment if for targeted panel 2. Fragmentation if needed 3. End repair, A-tailing, linker modification amplification 1. Fragment analysis (single read) 2. Paired-end analysis 3. Mate-pair analysis 1. Machine formatted base calls 2. Nucleotide formatted base calls 3. Mapping an alignment to a reference human genome sequence 4. Marking of duplicate sequencing reads 5. Base quality calibration 6. Analysis-ready reads 1. Variant calling: SNVS, indels, CNVs, SVs 2. Date visualization 3. Variant validation 4. Annotation 5. Integrated consideration of segregation analysis, linkage, association testing, pathway modeling, interaction analysis, additional functional studies 6. Variant assigned as benign, uncertain, or pathogenic Fig. 98.2 Overview of the next-generation DNA sequencing workflow. CNV, Copy number variant; Indels, insertions and deletions; SNV, single nucleotide variant; SV, structural variant. (Adapted from Casey G, Conti D, Haile R, et al. Next generation sequencing and a new era of medicine. Gut. 2013;62(6):920-932.) Table 98.2 Variants That Are Incidental Findings Are Assigned to One of Four Categories Childhood onset Medically actionable* Childhood onset Not medically actionable Adult onset Medically actionable* Adult onset Not medically actionable* *"Medically actionable" refers to a variant in a gene in which knowledge of the particular variant will affect medical decision-making, such as initiation of a treatment or family planning. *"Not medically actionable" refers to variants that increase the individual's risk for a disease in which no treatment is proven to significantly change the disease natural history. From Bick D, Dimmock D. Whole exome and whole genome sequencing. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2011;23:594-600. discrimination, including denial of health, life, or disability insurance, or employment (see Chapter 95). It is generally agreed that predictive genetic tests should be per- formed for children only if the results of the test will benefit the medical management during childhood; otherwise, the test should be deferred until the individual understands the risks and benefits of testing and can provide their own informed consent. Individual states offer vary- ing degrees of protection from discrimination on the basis of genetic testing. A major milestone in the prevention of genetic discrimination was the passage of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) in 2008, which is a U.S. federal law that prohibits discrimina- tion in health coverage or employment based on genetic information. Of note, it does not protect against refusal of life insurance. Predispositional genetic testing is available with the goal of pre- dicting risk of disease. The rationale for predispositional testing is that the results would lead to strategies aimed at risk reduction as part of a personalized approach to healthcare maintenance. This might include avoidance of environmental exposures that would increase risk of dis- ease (cigarette smoking and @j-antitrypsin deficiency), medical sur- veillance (familial breast cancer and mammography), or in some cases, pharmacologic treatment (statins and hypercholesterolemia). Common disorders are multifactorial in etiology, and many dif- ferent genes may contribute to risk of any specific condition (see Chapter 103). Most genetic variants found to correlate with risk of a common disease add small increments of relative risk and. in most cases, too little to guide management based on a single variant. Statistical models for predicting risk based on a collection of DNA variants has been integrated into approaches such as polygenic risk scores. By combining the relative risk conferred by a group of DNA variants, the goal is to quantify a larger proportion of risk for a spe- cific disease. These predictions are confounded by the source of data from which they are generated, and current population genetic data have limitations including lack of ethnic diversity and population stratification. PHARMACOGENETICS Polymorphisms in drug metabolism genes can result in distinctive patterns of drug absorption, metabolism, excretion, or effective- ness. Knowledge of individual genotypes can guide pharmacologic therapy, allowing customization drug choice and dosage to avoid toxicity and provide a therapeutic response. Well-known exam- ples include testing for polymorphisms within the methylene- tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene for susceptibility of potentially increased toxicity to methotrexate antimetabolite therapy and thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) to avoid adverse effects with 6-mercaptopurine therapy (Fig. 98.3). Pediatric Pharmacogenomics Pharmacogenomics is the study of how variants contribute to interindi- vidual variability in drug response. The finding that drug responses can be influenced by the patients genetic profle offers great hope for realiz- ing individualized pharmacotherapy, in which the relationship between genotype and phenotype (either disease and/or drug response) is predic- tive of drug response. In addition to genetic differences, environmen- tal factors (e.g., diet, concomitant drug or toxic exposure), physiologic variables (age, sex, pregnancy), and patient adherence all contribute to variations in drug metabolism and response. Interindividual differ- ences in children are further complicated by the changing patterns of gene expression occurring during the developmental processes from birth through adolescence. Combining these genetic and nongenetic individual-specific variables, it is expected that children will benefit from the promise of precision medicine, e.g., identifying the right drug for the right patient at the right time and dosing (Fig. 98.4). Examples of pharmacogenomic traits include specific adverse drug reactions, such as prolonged respiratory muscle paralysis due to succiny!- choline, hemolysis associated with antimalarial therapy, carbamazepine- induced Stevens-Johnson syndrome, isoniazid-induced neurotoxicity, and others (Table 98.3). The pharmacokinetic properties of a drug are determined by genes that control drug absorption, distribution, metabo- lism, and excretion. Drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters play a particularly important role in this process. One of the better rec- ognized clinical manifestations of pharmacogenomic variability in drug biotransformation is an increased risk of concentration-dependent tox- icity caused by reduced clearance and consequent tissue drug accumu- lation. Equally important is the lack of efhcacy caused by variations in metabolism of prodrugs that require biotransformation to be converted into a pharmacologically active form. The pharmacogenomics of drug receptors and other target proteins involved in signal transduction or disease pathogenesis are also expected to contribute to interindividual variability in drug disposition and response. 

752 Part VIII • Human Genetics HO SH N: 6TU (inactive) N ОН SCHg P-ribose MeTIMP Fig. 98.3 Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) polymorphism. A, 6-Mercaptopurine (6MP) undergoes metabolism to thioguanine nucleotides (TGNs) to exert its cytotoxic ef- fects. TPMT and xanthine oxidase reduce the amount of 6MP available for the bioactivation pathway to TGNs. TPMT can also methylate 6-thioinosine 5'-monophosphate (TIMP) to gen- erate a methylated compound capable of inhib- iting de novo purine synthesis. B, Distribution of TPMT activity in humans. Of the population, 89% has high activity, whereas 11% has interme- diate activity. Approximately 1 in 300 individu- als homozygous for two loss-of-function alleles has very low activity. C, Correlation between the TPMT genotype and intracellular TGN con- centrations. In TPMT-poor metabolizers, more 6MP is available to go down the bioactivation pathway to form TGNs; this situation is asso- ciated with an increased risk of myelosuppres- Percent of population sion. D, The most common variant TPMT allele is the result of two pathogenic variants that give rise to an unstable protein product that undergoes proteolytic degradation. Each box B represents an exon. Non-coding sequences are shown as white boxes and colored boxes indicate coding sequences. 6TU, 6-Thiouric acid; MeMP, 6-methylmercaptopurine; HPRT, 6-thiomethylinosine 5-monophosphate; MeT- hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase; wt, wild type; mut, mutant; Ala, ala- nine; Thr, threonine; Tyr, tyrosine; Cys, cysteine. (Modified from Relling MV, Dervieux T. Pharma- cogenetics and cancer therapy. Nat Rev Can- D cer. 2001;11:99-108.) 10 wt/wt wt/mut 2' mut mut 0- 5 10 15 20 TPT activity TPMT*1| (wild-type) TPMT*3A Individuals are classified as "fast, "rapid," or "extensive" metabo- lizers at one end and "slow" or "poor" metabolizers at the other end of the continuum. For biotransformation, fetuses and newborns may be phenotypically "slow" or "poor" metabolizers for certain drug- metabolizing pathways because of their stage of development, and they may acquire a phenotype consistent with their genotype at some point later in the developmental process. Moreover, not all infants acquire drug metabolism activity at the same rate, and there is inter- individual variability in the trajectory (i.e., rate and extent) of drug biotransformation capacity (Fig. 98.5). The primary organ respon- sible for drug metabolism is the liver, although the kidney, intestine, lung, adrenals, blood (phosphatases, esterases), and skin can also bio- transform certain compounds. Drug biotransformation is character- ized by three important features: (1) broad substrate specificity, in which a single isozyme may metabolize a large variety of chemically diverse compounds; (2) many different enzymes may be involved in the biotransformation of a single drug (enzyme multiplicity); and (3) a given drug may undergo several different types of reactions. Drug biotransformation reactions are classified into phase I reactions that SH SCH3 TPMT 6MP MeMP (inactive) HPRT SH SH TPMT H2N - ribose PPP-ribose TIMP TGNs Inhibition of de novo purine synthesis DNA incorporation Anti-leukemic effect Myelosuppression 30001 Intracellular TGN concentration 2000- 1000- TPMT genotype: mut/mut wumut wt/wt 25 30 C Myelosuppression 1 Risk secondary cancer I Toxicity 1 Risk of relapse 460 G>A Ala→Thr 719 A>G Tyr→Cys introduce or reveal (through oxidation, reduction, or hydrolysis) a functional group within the substrate drug molecule that serves as a site for phase Il reactions. These reactions involve conjugation with endogenous substrates (such as acetate, glucuronic acid, glutathi- one, glycine, and sulfate), making the compound more water soluble to be excreted in urine. A supergene family with at least 16 pri- mary cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes are quantitatively the most important phase I enzymes and catalyze the metabolism of many lipophilic endogenous (steroids, fatty acids, fat-soluble vitamins, prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxanes) and exogenous com- pounds, including a multitude of drugs and environment toxins. The specific CYP isoforms responsible for the majority of human drug metabolism are CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4. These enzymes are the products of genes that in some cases are polymorphically expressed, with allelic variants producing enzymes generally resulting in either no or reduced catalytic activ- ity. At birth the activities of drug-oxidizing enzymes in the liver are reduced, which results in slow clearance (and prolonged elimination) of several substrate drugs (e.g., phenytoin, caffeine, diazepam). Phase 

WU W 8 20 0 8 18 09, Treatment Outcome Success Failure Minimal Toxicity Treat with conventional drug and dose Treat with alternative drug Excessive Treat with alternative Treat with alternative > Drug C Fig. 98.4 The promise of genomic medicine to human health and disease. The goal of personalized medicine is to identify subgroups of patients who will respond favorably to a given drug with mini- mum side effects, as well as those who will not respond or who will show toxicity with standard doses. A further benefit of pharmaco- genomics is to select the most appropriate alternative drug for pa- tients who cannot be treated successfully with conventional drugs and doses. (Adapted from Yaffe SJ, Aranda JV. Neonatal and Pedi- atric Pharmacology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004.) Il enzymes include arylamine N-acetyltransferases (NAT1, NAT2), uridine diphospho-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), epoxide hydro- lase, glutathione S-transferases (GSTs), sulfotransferases (SULTs), and methyltransferases (catechol O-methyltransterase, thiopurine S-methyltransferase, several N-methyltransferases). Phase II enzyme activity is decreased in the newborn and increases into childhood. Conjugation of compounds metabolized by isoforms of UGT (e.g., morphine, bilirubin, chloramphenicol) is reduced at birth but can exceed adult values by 3-4 years of age. Membrane transporters are involved in drug disposition and actively transport substrate drugs between organs and tissues. They include organic anion transporters (OATs), organic anion-trans- porting polypeptides (OATPs), organic cation transporters (OCTs), and the adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) transport- ers, such as P-glycoprotein and the multidrug-resistant proteins. Drug transporters are expressed at numerous barriers, such as intestinal epithelial cells, hepatocytes, renal tubular cells, and the blood-brain barrier (Fig. 98.6). Transporters are often determinants of drug resistance, and many drugs work by affecting the function of transporters. Polymorphisms in the genes encoding these trans- porters might affect drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion. Chapter 98 • Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice 753 > Drug B 98.1 Genetic Counseling Brendan Lee and Pilar L. Magoulas Genetic counseling is a communication process in which the genetic contribution to health, specific risks of transmission of a trait, and options to manage the condition are explained to individuals and their family members (Table 98.4). Genetic counselors are specialized healthcare providers trained in the psychosocial aspects of counsel- ing and the science of medical genetics who may serve as members of medical teams in many different specialties. The genetic counselor is expected to present information in a neutral, nondirective manner while providing resources and psychosocial support to the individual and family to cope with decisions that are made (see Table 98.4). In the prenatal setting, a common indication for genetic counseling is to assess risk of occurrence or recurrence of having a child with a genetic condition and to discuss management or treatment options that might be available before, during, or after the pregnancy, such as preimplanta- tion genetic testing, noninvasive prenatal screening, prenatal diagnosis or fetal intervention, and perinatal management. In pediatric and adult genetics practices, the goals of genetic counseling are to help establish a diagnosis in an individual, provide longitudinal care and psychosocial support to the family, and discuss the genetic basis and inheritance of the condition as it relates to immediate and distant family members. The genetic counseling role has expanded, particularly with advances in understanding the genetics of adult-onset or common and rare disease therapeutics. In the former context, genetic counseling has a major role in risk assessment for cancer, especially breast, ovarian, or colon cancer, for which well-defined risk models and genetic tests are available to assess risk to an individual. In the latter, the genetic coun selor may discuss developments in rare disease therapeutics and make appropriate referral for medical therapies. There are several situations in which genetic counseling plays a particularly important role. The first situation is the prenatal diag- nosis of a congenital anomaly or genetic disease. The need for infor- mation is urgent because a family must often make time-sensitive decisions about treatment and management options, such as fetal intervention or continuation of a pregnancy in the context of fetal anomalies. Risks to the mother must also be considered. The second type of situation occurs when a child is born with a life-threatening congenital anomaly or suspected genetic disease. Decisions must be made immediately on how much support should be provided to the child and whether certain types of therapy should be attempted. The third situation arises when there are concerns about a genetic con- dition affecting one later in life. This may occur in an adolescent or young adult with a family history of an adult-onset genetic disorder (e.g., Huntington disease, hereditary breast/ovarian cancer), in an individual with a suspected yet undiagnosed genetic condition, or if a couple with a personal or family history of a genetic condition (or a carrier) is planning a family. In these situations, it is often neces- sary to have several meetings with a family to discuss possible testing, screening, and management options. Urgency is not as much of an issue as being sure that they have as much information and as many options as are available. Last, with the advent of genomic testing in all areas of clinical care, pretest genetic counseling before testing is essential to provide individuals with accurate information regarding the types of results they may receive. During this process, individuals are also given the option of what type of results they want reported back to them, such as medically actionable results unrelated to the primary indication for testing and incidental findings. GENETIC COUNSELING ELEMENTS Components of a genetic counseling session and providing accurate information to families requires the following: • Taking a targeted family history and constructing a pedigree that diagrams the patient's relatives (including miscarriages, abortions, stillbirths, deceased persons) with their sex, age, ethnicity, and state of health, up to and including third-degree relatives. 

754 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 98.3 GENE BCHE CYP2C9 Examples of Effects of Gene Polymorphisms on Drug Response ENZYME/TARGET Butyrylcholinesterase Cytochrome P450 2C9 DRUG Succinylcholine Warfarin CYP2C19 Cytochrome P450 2C19 Clopidogrel CYP2D6 Cytochrome P450 2D6 Codeine G6PD HLA-A*3101 HLA-B*1502 HLA-B*5701 HLA-B*5801 NAT2 SLCO1B1 TPMT Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase Human leukocyte antigen A31 Human leukocyte antigen B15 Human leukocyte antigen B57 Human leukocyte antigen B58 N-Acetyltransferase 2 Primaquine (others) Carbamazepine Allopurinol Abacavir Flucloxacillin Allopurinol Isoniazid, hydralazine Organic anion-transporting protein (OATP) Simvastatin Thiopurine S-methyltransferase Azathioprine 6-Mercaptopurine UGT1A1 VKORC1 Uridine diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase Irinotecan 1A1 Vitamin K oxidoreductase complex 1 Warfarin CLINICAL RESPONSE Prolonged paralysis novie as a it wa reduced function tillag aquine, especially initial anticoagulant control. Individuals having ≥1 loss-of-function alleles have reduced capacity to form pharmacologically active metabolite of clopidogrel and reduced antiplatelet effect. Poor metabolizers (individuals with two loss-of- function alleles) do not metabolize codeine to morphine and thus experience no analgesic effect. Ultrarapid metabolizers (individuals with 23 functional alleles) may experience morphine toxicity. Hemolysis Carriers of HLA-A*3101 allele have increased risk of SJS and TEN from carbamazepine. Han Chinese carriers of HLA-B*1502 allele have increased risk of SJS and TEN from carbamazepine. Carriers of HLA-B*5701 allele have increased risk of hypersensitivity reactions to abacavir- and flucloxacillin-induced liver injury. Carriers of HLA-B*5801 allele have increased risk of severe cutaneous adverse reactions to allopurinol, including hypersensitivity reactions, SJS, and TEN. Individuals homozygous for "slow acetylation" polymorphisms are more susceptible to isoniazid toxicity, or hydralazine-induced systemic lupus erythematosus. Carriers of the SLCO1B1*5 allele are at increased risk for musculoskeletal side effects from simvastatin. Individuals homozygous for an inactivating pathogenic variant have severe toxicity it treated with standard doses of azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine; rapid metabolism causes undertreatment. UGT1A1*28 allele is associated with decreased glucuronidation of SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan, and increased risk of neutropenia. Individuals with a haplotype associated with reduced expression of VKORC1 protein (therapeutic target of warfarin) require lower doses of the drug for stable anticoagulation. SJS, Stevens-Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis. • Gathering information from hospital records about the affected in- dividual and, in some cases, about other family members. • Documenting prenatal, pregnancy, and delivery histories. • Reviewing the latest available medical, laboratory, and genetic infor- mation concerning the disorder. • Reviewing a careful physical examination of the affected individual (photographs, measurements) and of apparently unaffected individ- uals in the family (typically performed by a physician rather than a genetic counselor). • Reviewing genetic testing and screening options. • Establishing or confirming the diagnosis by the diagnostic tests available. • Providing psychosocial support to the individual and family throughout the diagnostic process. • Giving the family information about support groups and local and national resources. • Providing new information to the family as it becomes available (a mechanism for updating needs to be established). Genetic counseling sessions often include anticipatory guidance regarding the occurrence or risk of occurrence of a specific condition, knowledge of the diagnosis of the particular condition, natural history of the condition, genetic aspects of the condition, risk of recurrence, prenatal diagnosis and reproductive options, therapies and referrals, and provision of support resources. The Diagnostic Process If a specific diagnosis is made and confirmed, this should be discussed with the family and information provided in writing. Often, however, the disorder fits into a spectrum (e.g., one of many types of arthrogry- posis) or the diagnosis is clinical rather than confirmed with molecular testing. In these situations, the family needs to understand the limits of the diagnostic process and present knowledge, and that additional research will probably lead to better information in the future. Although it is not always possible to make an exact diagnosis, having a diagnosis as accurate as possible is important. Estimates of recurrence risk for various family members depend on an accurate diagnosis that 

100 80 - 60 40 20 Birth 5 10 15 25 (Infant) Child. Adult) 100 - 80 - 60 - 40 - 20 - 0 tr Birth 5 10 15 20 25 Age (yr) Fig. 98.5 "Developmental" phenotypes. Variability in developmen- tal changes in gene expression and functional enzyme activity are su- perimposed on pharmacogenetic determinants. Top, Developmental profile of a theoretical drug-metabolizing enzyme over a 25-year span in 20 individuals. Bottom, At maturity (adults), allelic variation within the coding region of the gene gives rise to two distinct phenotypes: high activity in 92% of the population (" extensive metabolizers"; red circles) and low activity in 8% of the population ("poor metabolizers"; yellow circles). However, there is also interindividual variability in the rate at which functional activity is acquired after birth. For example, the two phenotypes may not be readily distinguishable in newborn infants. Furthermore, there may be discrete periods during childhood in which the genotype-phenotype relationship may differ from that observed in adults (e.g., developmental stages at which enzyme activ- ity appears to be greater in children than in adults). (Adapted from Leeder JS. Translating pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics into drug development for clinical pediatric and beyond. Drug Discov Today. 2004;9:567-573.) Chapter 98 • Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice 755 Intestinal efflux P-gp, MRP2, MRP1, ОСТ1, ОАТР3, NTCP Oral intake Intestine Biliary excretion P-gp, MRP3, MRP2, SPGP Hepatic uptake OATP2, OATP8, OATP-B, OCT1, NTCP, OAT2, OAT3 Excretion IV - Vascular space Urinary Excretion Interstitial space considers the likelihood that a particular finding is isolated, associated with a syndrome, or nonsyndromic (e.g., isolated cleft lip and palate). When a specific diagnosis cannot be made (as in many cases of mul- tiple congenital anomalies), the various possibilities in the differential diagnosis should be discussed with the family and empirical informa- tion provided. If available, specific diagnostic tests should be discussed. Often, empirical recurrence risks can be given even without a specific laboratory-based diagnosis. At the same time, even negative laboratory testing can further modify this risk. Natural History of the Condition It is important to discuss the natural history of the specific genetic dis- order in the family. Affected persons and their families have questions regarding the prognosis and potential management or therapy that can be answered only with knowledge of the natural history. If there are other possible diagnoses, their natural history may also be discussed. If the disorder is associated with a spectrum of clinical outcomes or complications, the range of possible outcomes and variability of the condition, as well as treatment and referral to the appropriate special- ist, should be addressed. Brain transport Renal secretion P-gp, OAT3, OAT1, OAT3, OCT1, MRP1, MRP5, ОСТ2, ОАТР, OATP1 P-gp, MRP1 Fig. 98.6 Schematic diagram of important transport proteins and their known locations in humans. Spheres correspond to drug mol- ecules. (From American Pharmacists Association. Ritschel WA, Kearns GL, eds. Handbook of Basic Pharmacokinetics Including Clinical Ap- plications, 7th ed. Washington, DC: American Pharmacists Association, 2009. р 45.) Genetic Aspects of the Condition and Recurrence Risk The genetic aspects and risk of recurrence are important because all family members should be informed of their reproductive choices. The genetic basis of the disorder can be explained with visual aids (e.g., diagrams of chromosomes and inheritance patterns). It is important to provide accurate occurrence and recurrence risks for various members of the family, including unaffected individuals. If a definite diagnosis cannot be made, it is necessary to use empiri- cal recurrence risks. Genetic counseling gives patients the neces- sary information to understand the various options and to make their own informed decisions regarding pregnancy, adoption, assis- tive reproductive technologies, prenatal diagnosis, screening, car- rier detection, or termination of pregnancy. It may be necessary to have more than one counseling session. Even if a specific molecular diagnosis has been made and a well-defined inheritance pattern has been described for the condition, it is important to recognize that the principles of incomplete penetrance, variable expressivity, and germline/somatic mosaicism can contribute uncertainty to the recurrence risk and severity of a potentially affected pregnancy con- ception or child. Prenatal Diagnosis and Prevention Many different methods of prenatal screening and diagnosis are available, depending on the specific genetic disorder (see Chapter 117). The use of ultrasonography allows prenatal screening of ana- tomic abnormalities such as congenital heart defects. Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling are used to obtain fetal tissue for analy- sis of chromosomal abnormalities, biochemical disorders, and DNA studies. Maternal blood or serum sampling is used for some types of screening, including noninvasive prenatal screening by direct analy- sis of cell-free fetal DNA found in maternal blood, which is used for screening of conditions such as trisomy 21 and other aneuploidies. In addition, this source of cell-free fetal DNA has also been used clini- cally for DNA sequencing for selected dominant de novo conditions in the fetus that may occur with increased frequency with increasing paternal age. Current tests of fetal DNA from maternal blood should be considered screening tests, and invasive testing like amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling should be considered for confirmatory diagnostic testing. 

756 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 98.4 Indications for Genetic Counseling Advanced parental age • Maternal age 235 years • Paternal age ≥40 years Previous child with or family history of: • Congenital abnormality • Dysmorphology • Intellectual disability • Isolated birth defect • Metabolic disorder • Chromosome abnormality • Single-gene disorder Adult-onset genetic disease (presymptomatic testing) • Cancer • Huntington disease Pharmacogenomics Consanguinity Teratogen exposure (occupational, abuse) Repeated pregnancy loss or infertility Pregnancy screening abnormality • Maternal serum a-fetoprotein Maternal first-trimester screen • Maternal triple or quad screen or variant of this test • Fetal ultrasonography Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) • Fetal karyotype Heterozygote screening based on ethnic risk • Sickle cell anemia • Tay-Sachs, Canavan, and Gaucher diseases • Thalassemias Universal carrier screening panels Follow-up to abnormal neonatal genetic testing Prior to whole genome or exome sequencing Prior to preimplantation genetic testing Therapies and Referral Some genetic disorders require the care of multiple specialists. Many genetic conditions have diagnosis and management guidelines to aid in the treatment and management of these complex patients. Preven- tion of known complications is a priority, so close follow-up with the necessary specialists involved in the child's care is essential to identify any potentially concerning issues early. The psychologic adjustment of the family might also require specihc intervention. Some challenges may involve when to discuss the diagnosis of a chronic disease with the patient, siblings, and other family members or friends. The decision to do so should always involve the parents and an assessment of the maturity and capacity of the child or adolescent. Alternative medicines or nontraditional therapies are often brought to attention by parents after exhaustive internet searches. Such treat- ments should not necessarily be dismissed since the physician and genetic counselor should serve as an important resource for helping parents navigate the maze of nonstandard treatments. Instead, the relative merits of treatments should be framed in the context of cost and benefit, scientific rationale, evidence from controlled and observa- tional studies, the placebo effect, safety of the treatment, and the gaps in our own scientific knowledge base. Support Groups A large number of community and online lay disease-specific sup- port groups have been formed to provide information and to fund research on specific genetic and nongenetic conditions. An important part of genetic counseling is to give information about these groups to patients and to suggest a contact person for the families. Many groups have established websites and social media platforms with very helpful information. With the rise of social media and its ability to connect families with rare syndromes from around the world, it is important to stress to families that their individual disease course will be unique and significant biases of reporting occur on such platforms. This should be balanced by the benefit of sharing potential important natural history elements of the underlying rare disease. Follow-Up Families should be encouraged to continue to ask questions and keep up with new information about the specific disorder. New develop- ments often influence the diagnosis and therapy of specific genetic disorders. Nondirective Counseling Genetic counseling is usually nondirective; choices about reproduction are left to the family to decide what is right for them. The role of the counselor (physician, genetic counselor, nurse, medical geneticist) is to provide information in understandable terms and outline the range of options available. 98.2 Principles of Management and Treatment of Genetic Disorders Brendan Lee and Nicola Brunetti-Pierri TREATMENT OF GENETIC DISEASES Genetic conditions are often chronic disorders. Some are amenable to curative therapies, although there has been a rapid increase in the number of treatable disorders. Based on ongoing preclinical and clini- cal investigations, new therapies for a growing number of diseases are expected to become available in the near future. Surgical management is available for many conditions that are associated with congenital anomalies or predisposition to tumors. All patients and families should be provided information about the disorder, genetic counseling, antici- patory guidance, and appropriate medical surveillance. Resources for patients include the National Organization of Rare Disor- ders (www.rarediseases.org), the Genetic Alliance (www.geneticalliance. org), the National Library of Medicine (www.n/m.nih.gov/medlineplus/ geneticdisorders.html), and a large number of disease-specific websites. A current listing of federally and privately funded clinical trials, includ- ing many for genetic diseases, is available at www.ClinicalTrials.gov. Specific medical therapies for genetic disorders can be classified into physiologic and replacement therapies. Another approach to correct protein misfolding induced by missense pathogenic variants is through use of small molecules that specifically bind to mutant proteins, stabiliz- ing their conformation, thereby preventing early degradation, and allow- ing proper cellular trafficking and localization. This strategy has found successful applications for therapy of cystic fibrosis caused by specific CFTR pathogenic variants, including the F508del (see Chapter 454). PHYSIOLOGIC THERAPIES Physiologic therapies attempt to ameliorate the phenotype of a genetic disorder by modifying the physiology of the affected individual. The underlying defect itself is not altered by treatment. Physiologic therapies are used in the treatment of inborn errors of metabolism (see Chapter 104). These include dietary manipulations, such as reducing phenylala- nine intake by persons with phenylketonuria, coenzyme supplementa- tion for some patients with methylmalonic acidemia and mitochondrial diseases, stimulation of alternative pathways to excrete ammonia for those with urea cycle disorders, phototherapy to increase excretion of neurotoxic unconjugated bilirubin in Crigler-Najjar syndrome, bisphos- phonate treatment for those with osteogenesis imperfecta to reduce bone fractures, and avoiding cigarette smoking by persons with a-antitrypsin denciency or specihc foods and drugs by persons with glucose-6- phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency or acute intermittent porphyria. Physiologic treatments can be highly effective, but they usually need to be maintained for a lifetime because they do not affect the underlying genetic disorder. Many of these treatments are most effective early in life 

before irreversible damage has occurred. This is the rationale for com- prehensive newborn screening for inborn errors of metabolism. Many physiologic therapies use small-molecule pharmaceuticals (e.g., to remove ammonia in those with urea cycle disorders). Phar- macologic treatments directly target a defective cellular pathway that is altered by an abnormal or a missing gene product. One approach is the inhibition of an enzyme reaction that is upstream of the defi- cient enzyme to prevent accumulation of the toxic metabolites, such as the nitisinone (NTBC) for therapy of tyrosinemia type I. A simi- lar approach focuses on partially reducing the synthesis of the sub- strate of the abnormal enzyme or its precursors in lysosomal storage disorders (see Chapter 106.4). Other examples include targeting the FGFR3 signaling pathway by the C-type natriuretic peptide in achon- droplasia, FGF23 by the monoclonal antibody burosumab in X-linked hypophosphatemia, or the angiopoietin-like protein 3 (ANGPTL3) by the monoclonal antibody evinacumab in homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. REPLACEMENT THERAPIES Replacement therapies include replacement of a missing metabolite, an enzyme, an organ, or even a specific gene. Enzyme Replacement Enzyme replacement therapy is a component of the treatment of cys- tic fibrosis to manage intestinal malabsorption. Pancreatic enzymes are easily administered orally, because they must be delivered to the gastrointestinal tract. Recombinant alkaline phosphatase coupled to a bone-targeting motif is available for intravenous therapy of hypophos- phatasia, a skeletal disorder caused by alkaline-phosphatase deficiency. Enzyme replacement strategies are effective for several lysosomal storage disorders. Enzymes are targeted for the lysosome by modifica- tion with mannose-6-phosphate, which binds to a specific receptor. This receptor is also present on the cell surface, so lysosomal enzymes with exposed mannose-6-phosphate residues can be infused into the blood and are taken into cells and delivered to lysosomes. Enzyme replacement therapies are available for Gaucher disease and Fabry disease, most of the mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS I, II, IVA, VI, VII), acid lipase deficiency, a-mannosidosis, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis late infantile (CLN2), and Pompe disease, and are being tested for MPS IIIA and IIIB, meta- chromatic leukodystrophy, and Niemann-Pick disease type B. Other examples include enzyme replacement therapy with pegylated recombi- nant phenylalanine ammonia lyase for phenylketonuria that is effective at reducing blood phenylalanine concentrations in most patients, such that most of them can come off a phenylalanine-restricted diet. One complication of enzyme replacement therapy is antibody response to the infused recombinant enzyme. The magnitude of this response is not always predictable and varies depending on the enzyme preparation and the disease. In most cases, the patient's antibody response does not affect the treatment's efficacy (e.g., Gaucher disease), but in other situations it may be a significant hurdle (e.g., Pompe dis- ease and phenylketonuria). Transplantation Cell transplantation and organ transplantation are potentially effective approaches to replacement of a defective gene. Aside from transplanta- tion to replace damaged tissues, transplantation of stem cells, liver, or bone marrow is also used for several diseases, mainly inborn errors of metabolism, and hematologic or immunologic disorders. A successtul transplant can be essentially curative, although there may be significant risks and side effects (see Chapters 177-181). Cell and tissue transplanta- tion is effective in many clinical scenarios, but there is always short-term morbidity, often associated with either surgical (liver) or preparative (bone marrow) regimens, and long-term morbidity related to chronic immunosuppression and graft failure. Bone marrow transplantation is the best example of stem cell therapy, but much effort also is focused on identifying, characterizing, expanding, and using other tissue stem cells for regenerative therapies. In contrast to transplantation from a healthy donor, the infused cells are the patient's own cells in ex vivo gene therapy of hematopoietic stem cells. Therefore, although it requires preparative Chapter 98 • Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice 757 myeloablation akin to regular bone marrow transplantation from healthy donors, engraftment of genetically modified hematopoietic stem cells is devoid of risks of rejection or graft-versus-host disease. Increasingly, this approach is combined with gene therapy after genetic correction of autologous stem cells. Gene Therapy Another approach focuses on replacing or correcting a defective gene (gene therapy). In theory, if one can target the specific tissue that has a deficiency in the gene or gene product, this can offer a less invasive means of achieving a cure for a genetic disorder compared to trans- plantations. Ultimately, gene therapy depends on the unique interac- tion of the disease pathophysiology, which is specific to the patient, and the gene delivery vehicle. Gene-transfer vehicles include viral and nonviral vectors administered through ex vivo or in vivo approaches. In ex vivo approaches the patients cells are removed and after gene correction or replacement are infused into the patient. An example of this is the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) -approved chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy for lym- phomas and leukemias. In the in vivo approaches the gene therapy vector is directly injected into the body by either systemic (e.g., intravenous) or localized (e.g., intracerebral, intraocular) injections. Most human clinical trials have used viral vectors because of their efficiency of gene delivery to tissues. In some diseases, such as X-linked and adenosine deaminase- deficient severe combined immunodeficiency, chronic granulomatous dis- ease, and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, clinical gene therapy is a viable and effective option. Ex vivo gene transfer of hematopoietic stem cells can be considered at least as effective to allogenic hematopoietic stem cell trans- plantation in presymptomatic patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystro- phy, metachromatic leukodystrophy and Hurler syndrome. In vivo gene therapy is also promising for Leber congenital amaurosis by intraocular delivery, and hemophilias and several inborn errors of liver metabolism by systemic intravenous injection. In vivo gene therapy is FDA approved for treatment of a specific RPE65-deficient form of retinitis pigmentosa using adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated expression of the normal RPE65 gene via subretinal injections. In vivo AAV-mediated gene therapy is also an approved treatment that has significantly changed the early course of the disease and improved motor function in children with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) (see Chapter 652.2). Although patients with SMA typically present with muscle atrophy, respiratory fail- ure, and die before 2 years of age, treated patients have remained healthy and attained motor milestones that are typically not achieved in any of the untreated patients. Similar ethcacy has also been achieved by intrathecal delivery of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) correcting SMN2 splicing Brain-directed gene therapy is available for aromatic L-amino acid decar- boxylase (AADC) deficiency by intracerebral injections of an AAV-based vector. Systemic intravenous AAV-based gene therapy vectors have been approved for both hemophilia A and B. Gene editing with direct correction of a disease-causing patho- genic variant is another possible approach to genetic therapy. Various nucleases with specific DNA-recognition sequences are available for genome editing; they include zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)/CRISPR-associated nine (Cas9). They all permit perma- nent gene modification of genes in cells. This is achieved by DNA site-specific double-strand breaks (DSBs) induced by the endonu- clease and a template encompassing the wild-type sequence to be used as a substrate for repair by homology-directed repair (HDR). Following site-specific DSB, DNA repair is mediated by either non- homologous end joining (NHEJ) or HDR that repairs DNA in the presence of a donor sequence (Fig. 98.7A and B). NHEJ repairs the DSB by joining the two ends of the DSB, often introducing small insertions or deletions (indels) at the DSB site that generally inactivate gene function (see Fig. 98.7A). Compared with NHE], HDR is less efficient and requires a donor DNA template (see Fig. 98.7C). The wild-type copy of the mutated gene can be integrated into the endogenous locus or into "safe harbors" that allow high expression levels of the therapeutic gene (see Fig. 98.7A). Based on 

758 Part VIII • Human Genetics DNA double strand break - CRISPR/Cas9 Indel = 7- Indel of nucleotides (e.g., inactivation of CCR5 or BCL11A enhancer) DNA donor ' sequence =7 - Targeted insertion (e.g., Factor IX into the albumin locus) in is DNA double strand break V & Pathogenic variant 5' 3' DNA double strand break 2 Pathogenic variant Mutated DNA deletion Donor sequence = Targeted deletion (e.g., exons of dystrophin with pathogenic variant, triplet expansion) B Fig. 98.7 A, Double-strand breaks can be repaired by nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) repair mechanisms, giving rise to small insertions and deletions (Indel) that can disrupt gene expression (blue). B, Two double-strand breaks can also be corrected by NHEJ and can eliminate the DNA carrying the pathogenic variant (pink) located between the two breaks. C, Double-strand breaks can be repaired by homology-directed repair mechanisms in the presence of a donor template allowing the incorporation of a donor sequence (yellow) that correct the mutated gene. CRISPR/ Cas9, Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat/CRISPR-associated nine (Cas9). these features, genome editing has the potential to overcome several limitations of gene replacement therapy. First, genotoxicity due to ectopic activation of nearby protooncogenes or knockout of tumor suppressor genes does not occur with on-target editing. Second, genome editing allows physiologic regulation of the expression of the corrected gene in contrast to gene replacement therapy. Third, gene editing is maintained in proliferating cells, and it overcomes the dilution effect due to cell division that is observed with gene replacement therapy by nonintegrating vectors such as AAV vectors. Genome editing tools have corrected the gene defect in several preclinical murine models and are in clinical trials. ZENs have been used ex vivo to disrupt CCR5 expression in human T cells to induce resistance to HIV infection. ZFNs and CRISPR/Cas9 are being used to boost fetal hemoglobin in -thalassemia and sickle cell disease by disrupting the enhancer of the BCL11A gene, which suppresses fetal hemoglobin production. Moreover, ZFN-mediated targeted introduc- tion of therapeutic genes downstream of the highly active albumin promoter in hepatocytes is currently under clinical investigation for several diseases. RNA-Targeted Therapy Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are short synthetic nucleic acids that hybridize with cellular RNA using classic base pairing to modu- late gene expression. lo ensure specincity, their sequences are com- plementary to their target sequences (Fig. 98.8). Through binding to pre-mRNA or mRNA, ASOs can posttranscriptionally regulate protein synthesis by mechanisms including modification of pre-mRNA pro- cessing and splicing, competitive inhibition, steric blockade of trans- lational machinery, and degradation of the target RNA. Clinical ASOs have been developed for treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy and SMA, respectively (Table 98.5). In SMA, SMN1 and SMN genes are identical (99% homology), except for an 11-nucleotide sequence in exon seven that alters splicing (see Chapter 652.2). Splicing of the SMN2 pre-mRNA leads to the exclusion of exon seven, generating a truncated, unstable protein that is rapidly degraded. Therefore SMN2 cannot compensate for SMN1 loss in SMA. The ASO designed to cor- rect SMN2 splicing by promoting the inclusion of exon seven allows SMN2 to compensate for the loss of expression caused by the SMN1 pathogenic variant. ASOs are also effective for treatment of homozy- gous familial hypercholesterolemia and have been also designed to inhibit HTT mRNA to reduce concentrations of mutant huntingtin in Huntington disease. Conjugation of siRNA with GalNAc to target the asialoglycoprotein receptor is an efficient strategy to facilitate cell uptake and to increase SiRNA liver accumulation (see Fig. 98.8). A GalNAc-siRNA targeting the mRNA for aminolevulinate synthase 1 (ALAS1), the first enzyme in the heme synthesis pathway, has been developed for treatment of acute hepatic porphyria, and a similar strategy targeting glycolate oxidase is effective at reducing oxalate levels for treatment of primary hyperox- aluria type 1. Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) are spherical structures with a com- position very similar to cell membranes and are suitable carriers for 

Chapter 98 • Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice 759 Base OH Base AAV SSDNA AAV LNP ASO (GaINAc), carbohydrate moiety ОН HO HO Scaffold NHAC но ОН HO - 220. NHAC OH H N- O. H -0. NINI HO H HO - 20. NHAC _NH C/2 tether GalNAc-siRNA Fig. 98.8 Approved delivery technologies for in vivo gene therapy. Four platform technologies have been clinically approved for gene-based therapies of genetic diseases: adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector containing a 4.7-kb single-stranded DNA with inverted terminal repeats (ITRs), antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) therapeutics, lipid nanoparticle (LNP) containing siRNA or mRNA including key lipid components, and N-acetyl- galactosamine-short-interfering RNA (GALNAc-siRNA) therapeutics made of a trivalent ligand with terminal GalNAc moieties covalently linked to siRNA at the 3'-end of the sense strand. Table 98.5 Approved In Vivo Gene-Based (DNA and RNA) Therapies for Genetic Disorders PRODUCT ASO Eteplirsen Golodirsen Casimersen GENE TARGET DISEASE ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION Inotersen Nusinersen Dystrophin (exon 51) Dystrophin (exon 53) Dystrophin (exon 45) Transthyretin (TTR) Survival of motor neuron two (SMN2) Apolipoprotein B-100 Apolipoprotein CIlI Duchenne muscular dystrophy Duchenne muscular dystrophy Duchenne muscular dystrophy TTR-mediated amyloidosis Spinal muscular atrophy Hypercholesterolemia Familial chylomicronemia Intrathecall Subcutaneous Subcutaneous Subcutaneous Intrathecall Mipomersen Volanesorsen GALNAC-SIRNA CONJUGATES Givosiran Subcutaneous Subcutaneous ALAS1 Inclisiran PCSK9 Acute hepatic porphyrias Hypercholesterolemia Primary hyperoxaluria type 1 Subcutaneous Subcutaneous Lumasiran LNP-RNA Patisiran AAV VECTORS Voretigene neparvovec-rzyl Onasemnogene abeparvovec Eladocagene exuparvovec Valoctocogene roxaparvovec Etranacogene dezaparvovec Glycolate oxidase TTR siRNA TTR-mediated amyloidosis RPE65 (AAV2) SMIN1 (AAV9) Leber congenital amaurosis Spinal muscular atrophy DDC (AAV2) AADC deficiency Factor VIII (AAV5) Hemophilia A Factor IX (AAV5) Hemophilia B AAV, Adeno-associated virus; AADC, aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase; ASO, antisense oligonucleotides; LNP, lipid nanoparticle. Subcutaneous Intravenous Subretinall Intravenous Bilateral intraputaminal infusions Intravenous Intravenous 

760 Part VIII • Human Genetics nucleic acid delivery, such as siRNA and mRNAs (see Fig. 98.8). A liver targeting LNP carrying an siRNA targeting transthyretin has been effective for treatment of hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis that has been recently approved. In various preclinical models, LNPs have been shown to deliver mRNA molecules to hepatocytes with high efficiency. LPs are being used for the delivery of gene editing molecules such as 2FNs and Cas9 mRNA together with a single guide (sg)RNA. In addition, LNPs have been used for delivery of genome editing tools such as LFNs and CRISPR/Cas9 together with a viral vector carrying a promoterless DNA sequence capable of homologous recombination that can result in high levels of the integrated sequence and short-term expression of the endonucleases. Correction of Genetic Diseases in the Human Germline Prevention of genetic diseases has been accomplished by preimplanta- tion genetic diagnosis (PGD). This procedure requires in vitro fertil- ization and single-embryo cell genetic testing of the known families' pathogenic variant and is performed with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the affected gene. To avoid disease recurrence, only the unaffected embryos are implanted. With the advent of efficient genome editing by CRISPR/Cas9, editing human embryos is techni- cally possible. The announcement of the birth of "CRISPR babies" has led to calls for a moratorium on human germline genome editing, and currently, germline and/or embryonic gene editing studies in humans have not been approved. Given the limited understanding of the con- sequences of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated DSBs on the germline human genome, it is unlikely that these approaches will become available any In contrast, mitochondrial replacement therapies to avoid mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants are available. In one tech- nique, the pathogenic variant carrier mother's nuclear DNA is removed from the unfertilized oocyte and transferred to an unaf- fected mitochondrial donor oocyte (minus that cell's nuclear DNA). In another approach, the pronucleus from the pathogenic variant- carrier mother's fertilized oocyte is transferred to the unaffected mitochondrial donor's fertilized oocyte (minus the pronucleus). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 99 Chromosome Disorders Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee 99.1 Methods of Chromosome Analysis Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee Clinical cytogenetics is the study of chromosomes, including their structure, function, inheritance, and abnormalities. Chromosome abnormalities are very common and occur in approximately 1-2% of live births, 5% of stillbirths, and 50% of early fetal losses in the first trimester of pregnancy (Table 99.1). Chromosome abnormalities are more common among individuals with intellectual disability and play a significant role in the development of some neoplasias. Chromosome analyses are indicated in persons presenting with multiple congenital anomalies, dysmorphic features, and/or intellec- tual disability. The specific indications for studies include prenatal test- ing in conceptuses of women with advanced maternal age (>35 years), multiple abnormalities on fetal ultrasound, multiple congenital anom- alies, unexplained growth restriction in the fetus, postnatal problems Table 99.1 Incidence of Chromosomal Abnormalities in Newborn Surveys TYPE OF ABNORMALITY SEX CHROMOSOME ANEUPLOIDY Males (43,612 newborns) 47,XXY 47,XYY Other X or Y aneuploidy Total Females (24,547 newborns) 45,X 47,XXX Other X aneuploidy Total NUMBER APPROXIMATE INCIDENCE 45 45 32 122 1/1,000* 1/1,000 1/1,350 1/360 male births 6 27 42 1/4,000 1/900 1/2,700 1/580 female births AUTOSOMAL ANEUPLOIDY (68,159 NEWBORNS) Trisomy 21 82 1/830 Trisomy 18 9 1/7,500 Trisomy 13 3 1/22,700 Other aneuploidy 2 1/34,000 Totall 96 1/700 live births STRUCTURAL ABNORMALITIES (68,159 NEWBORNS) Balanced Rearrangements Robertsonian Other 62 77 1/1,100 1/885 Unbalanced Rearrangements Robertsonian Other Totall All chromosome abnormalities 5 38 182 442 1/13,600 1/1,800 1/375 live births 1/154 live births *Recent studies show the prevalence is currently 1:580 (Morris JK, Alberman E, Scott C, Jacobs P. Is the prevalence of Klinefelter syndrome increasing? Eur J Hum Genet. 2008;16(2):163-170.) Data from Hsu LYF. Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities through amniocentesis. In: Milunsky A, ed, Genetic Disorders and the Fetus, 4th ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press; 1998: pp. 179-248. in growth and development, ambiguous genitalia, unexplained intel- lectual disability with or without associated anatomic abnormalities, primary amenorrhea or infertility, recurrent miscarriages (≥3) or prior history of stillbirths and neonatal deaths, a first-degree relative with a known or suspected structural chromosome abnormality, clinical findings consistent with a known anomaly, some malignancies, and chromosome breakage syndromes (e.g., Bloom syndrome, Fanconi Cytogenetic studies are usually performed on peripheral blood lym- phocytes, although cultured hbroblasts obtained from a skin biopsy may also be used. Prenatal (fetal) chromosome studies are performed with cells obtained from the amniotic fluid (amniocytes), chorionic villus tissue, and fetal blood or, in the case of preimplantation diag- nosis, by analysis of a blastomere (cleavage stage) biopsy, polar body biopsy, or blastocyst biopsy. Cytogenetic studies of bone marrow have an important role in tumor surveillance, particularly among patients with leukemia. These are useful to determine induction of remission and success of therapy, or in some cases the occurrence of relapses. 

Chromosome anomalies include abnormalities of number and structure and are the result of errors during cell division. There are two types of cell division: mitosis, which occurs in most somatic cells, and meiosis, which is limited to the germ cells. In mitosis, two genet- ically identical daughter cells are produced from a single parent cell. DNA replication (duplication of DNA material) has already occurred during interphase in the S phase of the cell cycle (DNA synthesis). Therefore, at the beginning of mitosis, the chromosomes consist of two double DNA strands joined together at the centromere, known as sister chromatids. Mitosis can be divided into four stages: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Prophase is characterized by condensation of the DNA. Also during prophase, the nuclear mem- brane and the nucleolus disappear and the mitotic spindle forms. In metaphase the chromosomes are maximally compacted and are clearly visible as distinct structures. The chromosomes align at the center of the cell, and spindle fibers connect to the centromere of each chromosome and extend to centrioles at the two poles of the mitotic figure. In anaphase the chromosomes divide along their longitudinal axes to form two separate daughter chromatids, which then migrate to opposite poles of the cell. Telophase is characterized by forma- tion of two new nuclear membranes and nucleoli, duplication of the centrioles, and cytoplasmic cleavage to form the two daughter cells. Meiosis begins in the female oocyte during fetal life and is com- pleted years to decades later. In males it begins in a spermatogonial cell sometime between adolescence and adult life and is completed in a few days. Meiosis is preceded by DNA replication so that at the outset, each of the 46 chromosomes consists of two chromatids. In meiosis, a diploid cell (2n = 46 chromosomes) divides to form four haploid cells (n = 23 chromosomes). Meiosis consists of two major rounds of cell division. In meiosis I, each of the homologous chromosomes pair pre- cisely so that genetic recombination, involving exchange between two DNA strands (crossing over), can occur. This results in reshuffling of the genetic information for the recombined chromosomes and allows further genetic diversity. Each daughter cell then receives one of each of the 23 homologous chromosomes. In oogenesis, one of the daughter cells receives most of the cytoplasm and becomes the egg, whereas the other smaller cell becomes the first polar body. Meiosis II is similar to a mitotic division but without a preceding round of DNA replication. Each of the 23 chromosomes divides longitudinally, and the homolo- gous chromatids migrate to opposite poles of the cell. This produces four spermatogonia in males, or an egg cell and a second polar body in females, each with a haploid (n = 23) set of chromosomes. Conse- quently, meiosis fulfills two crucial roles: It enables genetic recombi- nation, and it reduces the chromosome number from diploid (46) to haploid (23) so that on fertilization a diploid number is restored. Two common errors of cell division may occur during meiosis or mitosis, and either can result in an abnormal number of chromo- somes. The first error is nondisjunction, in which two chromosomes fail to separate during meiosis and thus migrate together into one of the new cells, producing one cell with two copies of the chromosome and another with no copy. The second error is anaphase lag, in which a chromatid or chromosome is lost during mitosis because it fails to move quickly enough during anaphase to become incorporated into one of the new daughter cells (Fig. 99.1). For chromosome analysis, cells are cultured (for varying periods depending on cell type), with or without stimulation, and then arti- ficially arrested in mitosis during metaphase (or prometaphase), later subjected to a hypotonic solution to allow disruption of the nuclear cell membrane and proper dispersion of the chromosomes for analysis, fixed, banded, and finally stained. The most commonly used banding and staining method is the GTG banding (G bands by trypsin using Giemsa), also known as G banding, which produces a unique combination of dark (G-positive) and light (G-negative) bands that permits recognition of all individual 23 chromosome pairs for analysis. Metaphase chromosome spreads are first evaluated microscopically, and then their images are photographed or captured by a video camera and stored on a computer for later analysis. Humans have 46 chromo- somes or 23 pairs, which are classified as autosomes for chromosomes Chapter 99 • Chromosome Disorders 761 46,N 46,N Nondisjunction 45,-2' 47, +21 46,N A 46,N 46,N/47,+21 46,N (46, XX 46,XX 46,XX B 46,XX 46,XX, Nondisjunction 45,X 47,XXX) 45, X/46,XX/47,XXX 47,+21) Anaphase ag 47,+21 47,+21) 46,N 47, +21) 47,+21) 47,+21) C 46,N/47,+21 Fig. 99.1 Generation of mosaicism. A, Postzygotic nondisjunction in an initially normal conceptus. In this example, one cell line (mono- somic 21) is subsequently lost, with the final karyotype 46,N/47, +21. B, Postzygotic nondisjunction in an initially 46,XX conceptus, resulting in 45, X/46,XX/47,XXX mosaicism. C, Postzygotic anaphase lag in an ini- tially 47, +21 conceptus. (From Gardner RJM, Sutherland GR. Chromo- some Abnormalities and Genetic Counseling, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2003: Fig. 43.1, p. 33.) 1-22, and the sex chromosomes, often referred as sex complement: XX for females and XY for males. The homologous chromosomes from a metaphase spread can then be paired and arranged systematically to assemble a karyotype according to well-defined standard conventions such as those established by International System for Human Cyto- genetic Nomenclature (ISCN), with chromosome 1 being the largest and 22 the smallest. According to nomenclature, the description of the karyotype includes the total number of chromosomes followed by the sex chromosome constitution. A normal karyotype is 46,XX for females and 46,XY for males (Fig. 99.2). Abnormalities are noted after the sex chromosome complement. Although the internationally accepted system for human chromo- some classification relies largely on the length and banding pattern of each chromosome, the position of the centromere relative to the ends of the chromosome also is a useful distinguishing feature (Fig. 99.3). The centromere divides the chromosome in two, with the short arm designated the p arm and the long arm designated the q arm. A plus or minus sign before the number of a chromosome indicates that there is an extra or missing chromosome, respectively. Table 99.2 lists some of the abbreviations used for the descriptions of chromosomes and their abnormalities. A metaphase chromosome spread usually 

762 Part VIII Human Genetics 2) 31 1 70 12 30 18 21 Fig. 99.2 Karyotype of a normal male at the 550-600 band level. The longer the chromosomes are captured at metaphase or sometimes pro- metaphase, the more bands can be visualized. 11 13 Fig. 99.3 Example of different chromosome types according to the position of the centromere. On the left is a chromosome one pair with the centromere equidistant from the short and long arm (also known as metacentric). In the center is a chromosome 11 pair that is submeta- centric. On the right is a chromosome 13 pair that is an example of an acrocentric chromosome. Acrocentric chromosomes contain a very small short arm, stalks, and satellite DNA. The black arrow indicates the position of the centromere. The blue arrow shows the long arm of a chromosome. The red arrow shows the short arm of a chromosome. The green arrow highlights the satellite region, which is made of DNA repeats. The light area between the short arm and the satellite is known as the stalk. shows 450-550 bands. Prophase and prometaphase chromosomes are longer, are less condensed, and often show 550-850 bands. High- resolution analysis may detect small chromosome abnormalities, although this has been mostly replaced by chromosome microarray analysis (CMA), also called array comparative genomic hybridiza- tion (aCGH). Molecular techniques (e.g., fluorescence in situ hybridization [FISH], CMA) identify subtle abnormalities that are often below the resolution of standard cytogenetic studies. FISH is used to identify the presence, absence, or rearrangement of specific DNA segments and is performed with gene- or region-specific DNA probes. Several FISH probes are used in the clinical setting: unique sequence or single-copy probes, repetitive-sequence probes (alpha satellites in the pericentromeric regions), and multiple-copy probes (chromosome specific or painting) (Fig. 99.4A,B). FISH or probe able involves using a unique, known DNA sequence or probe labeled with a fluorescent dye that is complementary to the studied region of disease interest. The labeled probe is exposed to the DNA on a microscope slide, typically metaphase or interphase chromo- somal DNA. When the probe pairs with its complementary DNA sequence, it can then be visualized by fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 99.5). In metaphase chromosome spreads, the exact chro- mosomal location of each probe copy can be documented, and often the number of copies (deletions, duplications) of the DNA sequence as well. When the interrogated segments (as in genomic duplications) are close together, interphase cells can accurately determine the presence of two or more copies or signals, because in chromosome-condensed metaphase cells some duplications might falsely appear as a single signal. Chromosome rearrangements <5 million bp (5 Mbp) cannot be detected by conventional cytogenetic techniques. FISH has facilitated the clinical characterization of several microdeletion syndromes (50- 200 kb of DNA). Some FISH probes hybridize to repetitive sequences located in the pericentromeric regions. Pericentromeric probes are still used for rapid identification of certain trisomies in interphase cells of blood smears, or even in the rapid analysis of prenatal samples from cells obtained through amniocentesis. Such probes are available for chromosomes 13, 18, and 21 and for the sex pair X and Y (see Fig. 99.4C and D). FISH is no longer the first line of testing, and its role has also mostly changed to the confirmation of chromosome microarray findings. FISH is reserved for (1) confirmation studies of abnormalities detected by CMA, (2) rapid prenatal screening on interphase amniotic fluid cells, and (3) interphase blood smear for sex assignment of new- borns who present with ambiguous genitalia. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a type of chro- mosomal microarray (CMA) that uses a molecular-based technique that differentially labels the patient's DNA with a fluorescent dye (green fluorophore) and a normal reference DNA with a red fluorophore (Figs. 99.6 and 99.7). Oligonucleotides (short DNA segments) encompassing the entire genome are spotted onto a slide or microarray grid. Equal amounts of the two-labeled DNA samples are mixed, and the green:red fluorescence ratio is measured along each tested area. Regions of ampli- fication of the patient's DNA display an excess of green fluorescence, and regions of loss show excess red fluorescence. If the patient's and the control DNA are equally represented, the green:red ratio is 1:1, and the tested regions are represented as yellow (see Chapter 96 and Fig. 96.5). Another frequently used chromosome microarray type in the clinical setting is the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array. SNPs are polymorphic variations between two nucleotides and, when analyzed in massive parallel fashion, they can provide valuable clini- cal information. Several million SNPs normally occur in the human genome. SNP arrays can help with the detection of uniparental diso- mies (i.e., genetic information derived from only one parent), as well as consanguinity in the family. Many arrays used in clinical practice combine the use of oligonucleotides for the detection of copy number variations (CNVs) in conjunction with SNPs. The detection of abnormalities by CMA is possible at the single-exon resolution level, depending on the configuration of the array used. The many advantages of CMA include its ability to test for duplica- tions or deletions in critical disease-causing regions of the genome at once, including single-gene and contiguous gene deletion syndromes. In addition, CMA does not require cell cultures to generate sufficient DNA, which may be important in the context of prenatal testing because of timing. However, CMA cannot detect balanced translo- cations or inversions and may not detect low levels of chromosomal mosaicism. Targeted CMAs can detect clinically known cryptic chro- mosomal aberrations associated with known disease phenotypes. CNV detection can also be diagnosed by next-generation sequencing in the context of whole genome sequencing. There are large numbers of deletion and duplication CNVs in the human genome. Thus many detected genetic abnormalities, unless associated with well-known clinical phenotypes, may require paren- tal investigations because a detected CNV that is inherited could be benign or an incidental polymorphic variant often described as variants of uncertain significance (VUS). A de novo abnormality (i.e., one found only in the child and not the parents) is often sig- nificant if it is associated with an abnormal phenotype found only in the child and if it involves genes with important functions. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Chapter 99 • Chromosome Disorders 763 Table 99.2 ABBREVIATION XX XY (##) Some Abbreviations Used for Description of Chromosomes and Their Abnormalities MEANING EXAMPLE cen del der dup ins inv ish nuc ish mar mos q r t ter / Female Male Number [#] of cells Centromere Deletion Derivative Duplication Insertion Inversion Metaphase FISH Interphase FISH Marker Mosaic Short arm Long arm Ring chromosome Translocation Terminal Slash Gain of Loss of FISH, Fluorescence in situ hybridization. 46,XX 46,XY 46,XY[12]/47,XXY[10] 46,XY,del(5p) 46,XX, der(2),t(2p12;7 q13) 46,XY, dup(15)(q11-q13) 46, XY, ins(3)(p 13q21q26) 46,XY,inv(2)(p21q31) 46,XX.ish del(7)(q11.23q11.23) nuc ish(DXZ1 x 3) 47,XY, +mar mos 45,X[141/46,XX[16] 46,XY, del(5)(p 12) 46,XY,del(5)(q14) 46,X, r(X)(p21 q27) t(2;8)(q33;q24.1) 46, XY,del(5)(p 12-pter) 45,X/46,XY 47,XX, +21| 45,XY,-21 99.2 Abnormalities of Chromosome Number Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee CONDITION Normal female karyotype Normal male karyotype Number of cells in each clone, typically inside brackets Mosaicism in Klinefelter syndrome with 12 normal cells and 10 cells with an extra X chromosome Male with deletion of chromosome 5 short arm Female with a structurally rearranged chromosome 2 that resulted from a translocation between chromosomes 2 (short arm) and 7 (long arm) Male with interstitial duplication in the long arm of chromosome 15 in the Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome region Male with an insertion within chromosome 3 A piece between g21 and g26 has reinserted on p13 Male with pericentric inversion of chromosome 2 with breakpoints at bands p21 and q31 Female with deletion in the Williams syndrome region detected by in situ hybridization Interphase in situ hybridization showing three signals for the X chromosome centromeric region Male with extra, unidentified chromosome material Turner syndrome mosaicism (analysis of 30 cells showed that 14 cells were 45,X and 16 cells were 46,XX) Male with a deletion on the short arm of chromosome 5, band p12 (short nomenclature) Male with a deletion on the long arm of chromosome 5, band 14 Female with one normal X chromosome and a ring X chromosome Interchange of material between chromosomes 2 and 8 with breakpoints at bands 2q33 and 8q24.1 Male with a deletion of chromosome 5 between p12 and the end of the short arm (long nomenclature) Separate lines or clones Mosaicism for monosomy X and a male cell line Female with trisomy 21 Male with monosomy 21 ANEUPLOIDY AND POLYPLOIDY Typical human cells contain 46 chromosomes, which is a multiple of 23 chromosomes. Haploid cells contain 23 chromosomes (n=23, typically in the ovum or sperm). If a cell's chromosomes are an exact multiple of 23 (46, 69, 92 in humans), those cells are referred to as euploid. Poly- ploid cells are euploid cells with more than the normal diploid num- ber of 46 (2n) chromosomes, such as 3n, 4n. Polyploid conceptions are usually not viable, but the presence of mosaicism with a karyotypi- cally normal cell line can allow survival. Mosaicism is an abnormality defined as the presence of two or more different cell lines in a single individual. Polyploidy is a common abnormality seen in first-trimester pregnancy losses. Triploid cells are those with three haploid sets of chromosomes (3n) and are only viable in a mosaic form. Nonmosaic triploid infants can be liveborn but typically die shortly after birth. Trip- loidy is often the result of fertilization of an egg by two sperm (dispermy). Failure of one of the meiotic divisions, resulting in a diploid egg or sperm, can also result in triploidy. The phenotype of a triploid conception depends on the origin of the extra chromo- some set. If the extra set is of paternal origin, it results in a partial hydatidiform mole (excessive placental growth) with poor embry- onic development, but triploid conceptions that have an extra set of maternal chromosomes result in severe embryonic restriction with a small, fibrotic placenta (insufficient placental development) that is typically spontaneously aborted. 

764 Part VIII • Human Genetics B D Fig. 99.4 A, Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of interphase peripheral blood cells from a patient with Down syndrome using a chromosome 21-specific probe. The three red signals mark the presence of three chromosomes 21. B, FISH analysis of a metaphase chromosome spread from a clinically normal individual using a whole chromosome paint specific for chromosome 5. Both chromosome 5s are completely labeled (yellow) along their entire length. C, FISH on metaphase cells using a unique sequence probe that hybridizes to the elastin gene on chromosome 7q11.23, inside the Williams syndrome critical region. The elastin probe is labeled in red, and a control probe on chromosome 7 is labeled in green. The left image shows normal hybridization to chromosome 7, with two signals for the elastin region and two for the control probe. The right image shows a normal chromosome on the right with control and elastin signals and a deleted chromosome 7 on the left, evidenced by a single signal for the control probe. This image corresponds to a patient with a Williams syndrome region deletion. D, FISH in interphase cells using DNA probes that hybridize to repetitive a-satellite sequences in the pericentromeric region for the sex chromosomes. Left, interphase cells with two signals, one labeled in red for the X chromosome and green for the Y chromosome, consistent with a normal male chromosome complement. Right, interphase cell showing two red signals for the X chromosome, compatible with a normal female chromosome complement. Chromosomal DNA on slide Denaturation Fig. 99.5 FISH involves dena- turation of double-stranded DNA as present in metaphase chro- mosomes or interphase nuclei on cytogenetic slide preparations (A) into single-stranded DNA (B). The slide-bound (in situ) DNA is then renatured or reannealed in the presence of excess copies of a single-stranded, fluorochrome- labeled DNA base-pair sequence The probe anneals or probedies To sites be compals mentary DNA sequence (D) within the chromosomal genome. Probe signal is visualized and imaged on the chromosome by fluorescent microscopy. (From Lin RL, Cherry AM, Bangs CD, et al. FISHing for answers: the use of molecular cy- togenetic techniques in adolescent medicine practice. In: Hyme HE, Greydanus D, eds, Genetic Disor- ders in Adolescents: State of the art reviews. Adolescent medicine. Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus; 2002: pp. 305-313.) B Renaturation with fluorochrome-labeled DNA probe - - Chromosome with fluorescent probe signal Probe hybridization 1004D D 

Chapter 99 • Chromosome Disorders 765 - normal 15 _-q11.2 22 der (22) q26.1 15 der (15) 46,XY,t(15;22)(q26.1;q11.2) 15 ₽ e B der (15) 15:85716661-96053081, 10.3 Mb 85 Mb 89 Mb 92 Mb q25.3 96 Mb Fig. 99.6 Example of a cryptic mi- crodeletion at a translocation break- point of an apparently balanced translocation in a patient with de- velopmental delay (dd) and growth defect. A, Partial karyotype shows t(15;22)(q26.1;q11.2). Fluores- cence in situ hybridization (FISH) with clones 2019 (top arrow) and 354M14 (bottom arrow) at 15q26.1; arrows indicate signals only present on the normal chromosome 15, suggesting a deletion on the der(15). C, Two- color array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) with dye swap with 244 K oligo probes; arrowhead indicates a 3.3-Mbp deletion at chromosome 15026.1-026.2; arrow points to the close-up view of the de- letion. (From Li MM, Andersson HC. Clinical application of microarray- based molecular cytogenetics: an emerging new era of genomic medi- cine. J Pediatr. 2009;155:311-317, with permission of the authors and publisher.) 1,5 2 13 15 17 18 19202122x Fig. 99.7 Array comparative geno- michybridization (aCGH) in a female patient with Down syndrome. Each olack dot represents a piece of DNA segment specific for different chromo- some location. Most of the dots dis- played between the 0.0 and 0.2 axis are considered within normal range. Exceptions are often a result of poly- morphic variations. A group of dots colored in green clusters on chromo- some 21 and above 0.5. These rep- resent a gain in copy number of DNA segments for chromosome 21, as seen in Down syndrome and consistent with trisomy 21. T 

766 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 99.3 SYNDROME Trisomy 13, Patau syndrome Chromosomal Trisomies and Their Clinical Findings* INCIDENCE 1/10,000 births Trisomy 18, Edwards syndrome 1/6,000 births Trisomy 8, mosaicism 1/20,000 births CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Cleft lip often midline; flexed fingers with postaxial polydactyly; ocular hypotelorism, bulbous nose; low-set, malformed ears; microcephaly; cerebral malformation, especially holoprosencephaly; microphthalmia, cardiac malformations; scalp defects; hypoplastic or absent ribs; visceral and genital anomalies Early lethality in most cases, with a median survival of 12 days; ~80% die by 1 year; 10-year survival ~13%; survivors have significant neurodevelopmental delay Low birthweight, closed fists with index finger overlapping the third digit and the fifth digit overlapping the fourth, narrow hips with limited abduction, short sternum, rocker-bottom feet, microcephaly, prominent occiput, micrognathia, cardiac and renal malformations, intellectual disability -88% of children die in the first year; 10-year survival ~10%; survivors have significant neurodevelopmental delay Long face; high, prominent forehead; wide, upturned nose; thick, everted lower lip; microretrognathia; low-set ears; high-arched, sometimes cleft, palate; osteoarticular anomalies common (camptodactyly of second through fifth digits, small patella); deep plantar and palmar creases; moderate intellectual disability *For trisomy 21, see Chapter 57. Abnormal cells that do not contain a multiple of haploid number of chromosomes are termed aneuploid cells. Aneuploidy is the most common and clinically significant type of human chromosome abnor- mality, occurring in at least 3-4% of all clinically recognized pregnan- cies. Monosomies occur when only one, instead of the normal (two), of a given chromosome is present in an otherwise diploid cell. In humans, most autosomal monosomies appear to be lethal early in development, and survival is possible in mosaic forms or by means of chromosome rescue (restoration of the normal number by duplication of single monosomic chromosome, also known as monosomy rescue). An exception to this rule is monosomy for the X chromosome (45,X), seen in Turner syndrome; nonetheless, the majority of 45, concep tuses are believed to be lost early in pregnancy for as yet unexplained reasons. The most common cause of aneuploidy is nondisjunction, the fail- ure of chromosomes to disjoin normally during meiosis (see Fig. 99.1). Nondisjunction can occur during meiosis I or II or during mitosis, although maternal meiosis I is the most common nondisjunction in aneuploidies (e.g., Down syndrome, trisomy 18). After meiotic nondis- junction, the resulting gamete either lacks a chromosome or has two copies instead of one normal copy, resulting in a monosomic or triso- mic zygote, respectively. Trisomy is characterized by the presence of three chromosomes, instead of the normal pair (two), of any particular chromosome. Tri- somy is the most common form of aneuploidy. Trisomy can occur in all cells, or it may be mosaic. Most individuals with a trisomy exhibit a consistent and specific phenotype depending on the chromosome FISH is a technique that can be used for rapid diagnosis in the prenatal detection of common tetal aneuploidies, including chromo- somes 13, 18, and 21, as well as sex chromosomes (see Fig. 99.4C and D). Direct detection of cell-free fetal DNA (trophoblastic or placental origin) in maternal plasma for fetal trisomy detection is a safe and highly effective screening test for fetal aneuploidy. The most com- mon numerical abnormalities in liveborn children include trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) (see Chapter 57); trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome); trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome); and sex chromosomal aneuploidies, syndrome (usually 45X), Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY), 47,XXX, and 47,XYY. By far the most common type of trisomy in liveborn infants is trisomy 21 (47,XX,+21 or 47,XY,+21) (see Table 99.1). Trisomy 18 and trisomy 13 are relatively less com- mon and are associated with a characteristic set of congenital anom- alies and severe intellectual disability (Table 99.3). The occurrence of trisomy 21 and other trisomies increases with advanced maternal age (≥35 years). Because of this increased risk, women who are ≥35 years old at delivery should be offered genetic counseling and prena- tal diagnosis (including serum screening, ultrasonography, and cell- free DNA detection, amniocentesis, or chorionic villus sampling; see Chapter 117). 99.3 Abnormalities of Chromosome Structure Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee TRANSLOCATIONS Translocations, which involve the transfer of material from one chromosome to another, occur with a frequency of 1 in 500 live- born human infants. They may be inherited from a carrier parent or appear de novo, with no other affected family member. Translo- cations are usually reciprocal or Robertsonian, involving two chro- mosomes (Fig. 99.8). Reciprocal translocations are the result of breaks in nonhomolo- gous chromosomes, with reciprocal exchange of the broken segments. Carriers of a reciprocal translocation are usually phenotypically nor- mal but are at an increased risk for miscarriage caused by transmission of unbalanced reciprocal translocations and for bearing chromosom- ally abnormal offspring. Unbalanced translocations are the result of abnormalities in the segregation or crossover of the translocation car- rier chromosomes in the germ cells. Robertsonian translocations involve two acrocentric chromo- somes (chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 21, and 22) that fuse near the cen- tromeric region with a subsequent loss of the short arms. Because the short arms of all five pairs of acrocentric chromosomes have multiple copies of genes encoding for ribosomal RNA, loss of the short arms of acrocentric chromosomes has no deleterious effect. The resulting karyotype has only 45 chromosomes, including the translocated chromosome, which consists of the long arms of the two fused chromosomes. Carriers of Robertsonian translocations are usually phenotypically normal. However, they are at increased risk for miscarriage and unbalanced translocations in phenotypi- cally abnormal offspring. In some rare instances, translocations can involve three or more chromosomes, as seen in complex rearrangements. Another less 

< q24.1 +q33 der (2) 8 der(8) 2 B 13 der(13;14) 14 Fig. 99.8 A, Schematic diagram (left) and partial G-banded karyotype (right) of a reciprocal translocation between chromosome two (blue) and chromosome eight (pink). The breakpoints are on the long (q) arm of both chromosomes at bands 2q33 and 8q24.1, with the reciprocal exchange of material between the derivative (der) chromosomes 2 and 8. This translocation is balanced, with no net gain or loss of material. The nomenclature for this exchange is t(2;8)(q33:q24.1). B, Schematic diagram (left) and partial G-banded karyotype (right) of a Robertsonian translocation between chromosomes 13 (blue) and 14 (pink). The break- points are at the centromere (band q10) of both chromosomes, with fusion of the long arms into a single derivative chromosome and loss of the short (p) arm material. The nomenclature for this exchange is der(13;14)(q10;q10). common type is the insertional translocation. Insertional transloca- tions result from a piece of chromosome material that breaks away and later is reinserted within the same chromosome at a different site or inserted into another chromosome. INVERSIONS An inversion requires that a single chromosome breaks at two points; the broken piece is then inverted and joined into the same chromo- some. Inversions occur in 1 in 100 live births. There are two types of inversions, pericentric and paracentric. In pericentric inversions the breaks are in the two opposite arms of the chromosome and include the centromere. They are usually discovered because they change the posi- tion of the centromere. The breaks in paracentric inversions occur in only one arm. Carriers of inversions are usually phenotypically normal, but they are at increased risk for miscarriages, typically in paracen- tric inversions, and chromosomally abnormal offspring in pericentric inversions. DELETIONS AND DUPLICATIONS Deletions involve loss of chromosome material and, depending on their location, can be classified as terminal (at the end of chromo- somes) or interstitial (within the arm of a chromosome). They may be isolated or may occur along with a duplication of another chromosome segment. The latter typically occurs in unbalanced reciprocal chromo- somal translocation secondary to abnormal crossover or segregation in a translocation or inversion carrier. Chapter 99 • Chromosome Disorders 767 A carrier of a deletion is monosomic for the genetic information of the missing segment. Deletions are usually associated with intellectual disability and malformations. The most commonly observed deletions in routine chromosome preparations include 1p-, 4p-, 5p-, 9p-, 11p-, 13q-, 18p-, 18q-, and 21q- (Table 99.4 and Fig. 99.9), all distal or terminal deletions of the short or the long arms of chromosomes. Deletions may be observed in routine chromosome preparations, and deletions and translocations larger than 5-10 Mbp are usually visible microscopically. High-resolution banding techniques, FISH, and molecular stud- ies such as CMA can reveal deletions that are too small to be seen in ordinary or routine chromosome spreads (see Fig. 99.7). Microdele- tions involve loss of small chromosome regions, the largest of which are detectable only with prophase chromosome studies and molecular methods. For submicroscopic deletions, the missing piece can only be detected using molecular methodologies such as DNA-based studies (e.g., CMA, FISH). The presence of extra genetic material from the same chromosome is referred to as duplication. Duplications can also Table 99.4 Common Deletions and Their Clinical Manifestations DELETION 4p- 5p- 9р- 13а- 18p- 18g- CLINICAL ABNORMALITIES Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome. The main features are a typical "Greek helmet" facies secondary to ocular hypertelorism, prominent glabella, frontal bossing, microcephaly, dolichocephaly, hypoplasia of the orbits, ptosis, strabismus, nystagmus, bilateral epicanthic folds, cleft lip and palate, beaked nose with prominent bridge, hypospadias, cardiac malformations, and intellectual disability. Cri du chat syndrome. The main features are hypotonia, short stature, characteristic shrill cry in the first few weeks of life (also called cat's cry syndrome), microcephaly with protruding metopic suture, hypertelorism, bilateral epicanthic folds, high arched palate, wide and flat nasal bridge, and intellectual disability. The main features are craniofacial dysmorphic features with trigonocephaly, slanted palpebral fissures, discrete exophthalmos secondary to supraorbital hypoplasia, arched eyebrows, flat and wide nasal bridge, short neck with low hairline, genital anomalies, long fingers and toes with extra flexion creases, cardiac malformations, and intellectual disability. The main features are low birthweight, failure to thrive, microcephaly, and severe intellectual disability. Facial features include high, wide nasal bridge; hypertelorism; ptosis; and micrognathia. Ocular malformations are common (retinoblastoma). The hands have hypoplastic or absent thumbs and syndactyly. A few patients (15%) are severely affected and have cephalic and ocular malformations: holoprosencephaly, cleft lip and palate, ptosis, epicanthal folds, and varying degrees of intellectual disability. Most (80%) have only minor malformations and mild intellectual disability. The main features are growth deficiency and hypotonia with a "froglike" position with the legs flexed, externally rotated, and in hyperabduction. The face is characteristic, with depressed midface and apparent protrusion of the mandible, deep-set eyes, short upper lip, and everted lower lip ("carplike" mouth); antihelix of the ears is very prominent. Varying degrees of intellectual disability and belligerent personality are present. Myelination abnormalities occur in the central nervous system. 

768 Part VIII • Human Genetics B D Fig. 99.9 A, Child with velocardiofacial syndrome (deletion 22q11.2). B, Child with Williams syndrome (deletion 7q11.23). C, Child with Prader- Willi syndrome (deletion 15q11-13). D, Child with Angelman syndrome (deletion 15q11-13). (From Lin RL, Cherry AM, Bangs CD, et al. FISHing for answers: the use of molecular cytogenetic techniques in adolescent medicine practice. In: Hyme HE, Greydanus D, eds, Genetic Disorders in Adolescents: state of the art reviews. Adolescent medicine. Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus; 2002: pp. 305-313.) Table 99.5 DELETION 1p36 5q35 6p25 7q11.23 8p11 8q24.1-q24.13 9q22 9034 10p 12-p13 11p11.2 11p13 11q24.1-11qter 15q11-q13 (paternal) Microdeletion and Contiguous Gene Syndromes and Their Clinical Manifestations SYNDROME CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS 1p deletion Growth restriction, dysmorphic features with midface hypoplasia, straight thin eyebrows, pointy chin, sensorineural hearing loss, progressive cardiomyopathy, hypothyroidism, seizures, intellectual disability Sotos (50% are deletions of Overgrowth, macrocephaly, prominent forehead, prominence of extraaxial fluid spaces on NSD1 gene in Asians but brain imaging, large hands and feet, hypotonia, clumsiness, mental disabilities only 6% in Whites) Axenfeld-Rieger Williams 8p11 Langer-Giedion or tricho- rhinophalangeal type Il Gorlin 9q34 deletion DiGeorge type 2 Potocki-Shaffer WAGR Jacobsen Prader-Willi Axenfeld-Rieger malformation, hearing loss, congenital heart defects, dental anomalies, developmental delays, facial dysmorphism Round face with full cheeks and lips, long philtrum, stellate pattern in iris, strabismus, supravalvular aortic stenosis and other cardiac malformations, varying degrees of intellectual disability, friendly personality Kalmations drank type type andropi hopes dism end an disas, spherocytosis Sparse hair, multiple cone-shaped epiphyses, multiple cartilaginous exostoses, bulbous nasal tip, thickened alar cartilage, upturned nares, prominent philtrum, large protruding ears, mild intellectual disability Multiple basal cell carcinomas, odontogenic keratocysts, palmoplantar pits, calcification falx cerebri Distinct face with synophrys, anteverted nares, tented upper lip, protruding tongue, midface hypoplasia, conotruncal heart defects, intellectual disability Many of the fiery a parathyroidican dig air the features (conotruncal defects, Mutile altises, parietal foramina, craniosynostosis, facial dysmorphism, syndacty y, Hypernephroma (Wilms tumor), aniridia, male genital hypoplasia of varying degrees, ouse lasty formed auce, u, mard studi disalie ral fardaris, prosis, beaked nose, Growth restriction, intellectual disability, cardiac and digit anomalies, thrombocytopenia Severe hypotonia and feeding difficulties at birth, voracious appetite and obesity in infancy, short stature (responsive to growth hormone), small hands and feet, hypogonadism, intellectual disability Continued 

Chapter 99 • Chromosome Disorders 769 Table 99.5 Microdeletion and Contiguous Gene Syndromes and Their Clinical Manifestations-cont' d DELETION 15q11-q13 (maternal) SYNDROME CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS Angelman Hypotonia, feeding difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux, fair hair and skin, midface hypoplasia, prognathism, seizures, tremors, ataxia, sleep disturbances, inappropriate laughter, poor or absent speech, severe intellectual disability 16p13.3 Rubinstein-Taybi Microcephaly, ptosis, beaked nose with low-lying philtrum, broad thumbs and large toes, intellectual disability 17p11.2 Smith-Magenis Brachyehav midfarial ms, phasia pul dishi, myopia, left palate, short stature, 17p13.3 Miller-Dieker Microcephaly, lissencephaly, pachygyria, narrow forehead, hypoplastic male external genitals, growth restriction, seizures, profound intellectual disability 20p12 Alagille Bile duct paucity with cholestasis; heart defects, particularly pulmonary artery stenosis; ocular abnormalities (posterior embryotoxon); skeletal defects such as butterfly vertebrae; long nose 22q11.2 Velocardiofacial-DiGeorge Conotruncal cardiac anomalies, cleft palate, velopharyngeal incompetence, hypoplasia or agenesis of thymus and parathyroid glands, hypocalcemia, hypoplasia of auricle, learning disabilities, psychiatric disorders 22q13.3 deletion Hypotonge develts, auitil delay normal or accelerated growth, severe expressive Хр21.2-p21.3 Duchenne muscular dystrophy, retinitis pigmentosa, adrenal hypoplasia, intellectual disability, glycerol kinase deficiency Xp22.2-р22.3 Xp22.3 Ichthyosis, Kallmann syndrome, intellectual disability, chondrodysplasia punctata MLS Microphthalmia, linear skin detects, poikiloderma, congenital heart defects, seizures, intellectual disability Table 99.6 Microduplications and Their Clinical Manifestations DUPLICATION CHROMOSOME REGION DISEASE REGION 1q21.1 3q/29 7q11.23 15q13.3 15q24 16p 11.2 17p11.2 17q21.31 22q11.2 Xq28 Williams syndrome Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome Potocki-Lupski syndrome Velocardiofacial-DiGeorge syndrome MEC2 gene (Rett syndrome) DD, Developmental delay; FTT, failure to thrive; GH, growth hormone; ID, intellectual disability. CLINICAL FEATURES Macrocephaly, DD, learning disabilities Mild to moderate DD, ID, microcephaly DD and severe expressive language disorder, autistic features, subtle dysmorphisms DD, ID, autistic features in duplications of maternal origin Growth restriction, DD, microcephaly, digital anomalies, hypospadias, connective tissue abnormalities FTT, severe DD, short stature, GH deficiency, dysmorphic features Hypotonia, cardiovascular anomalies, FTT, DD, verbal apraxia, autism, anxiety Severe DD, microcephaly, short and broad digits, dysmorphic features Cardiovascular defects, velopharyngeal insufficiency In males: infantile hypotonia, immune deficiency, dysmorphic features, DD, speech delay, autistic behavior, regression in childhood 

770 Part VIII • Human Genetics be sporadic or result from abnormal segregation in translocation or inversion carriers. Microdeletions and microduplications usually involve regions that include several genes, so the affected individuals can have a distinc- tive phenotype depending on the number of genes involved. When such a deletion involves more than a single gene, the condition is referred to as a contiguous gene deletion syndrome (Table 99.5). With the advent of chromosome microarray, a large number of microduplications, have been uncovered. Many of those microdu- plication syndromes are the reciprocal duplications of the known deletions or microdeletion counterparts and have distinctive clinical features (Table 99.6). Subtelomeric regions are often involved in chromosome rear- rangements that cannot be visualized using routine cytogenetics. Telomeres, which are the distal ends of the chromosomes, are gene- rich regions. The distal repetitive sequence structure of telomeres is essentially common to all chromosomes, but proximal to these are unique regions known as subtelomeres, which typically are involved in deletions and other chromosome rearrangements. Small subtelo- meric deletions, duplications, or rearrangements (translocations, inversions) may be relatively common in children with nonspecific intellectual disability and minor anomalies. Subtelomeric rear- rangements have been found in 3-7% of children with moderate to severe intellectual disability and 0.5% of those with mild intellectual disability and can be detected by CMA studies. Pathogenic variants affecting telomere function and length have been associated with dyskeratosis congenita and other aplastic anemia syndromes, as well as pulmonary or hepatic fibrosis. Both the subtelo- meric rearrangements and the microdeletion and microduplication syndromes are typically diagnosed by molecular techniques like CMA and multiple ligation-dependent probe amplication (MLPA) studies CMA can detect 14-18% of abnormalities in patients who previously had normal cytogenetic studies. INSERTIONS Insertions occur when a piece of a chromosome broken at two points is incorporated into a break of a chromosome in another location. A total of three breakpoints are then required, and they can occur between two or within one chromosome. A form of non- reciprocal translocation, insertions are rare. Insertion carriers are at risk of having offspring with deletions or duplications of the inserted segment. ISOCHROMOSOMES Isochromosomes consist of two copies of the same chromosome arm joined through a single centromere and forming mirror images of one another. The most commonly reported autosomal isochromosomes tend to involve chromosomes with small arms. Some of the more com- mon chromosome arms involved in this formation include 5p, 8p, 9p, 12p, 18p, and 18q. There is also a common isochromosome abnormal- ity seen in long arm of the X chromosome and associated with Turner syndrome. Individuals who have one isochromosome X within 46 chromosomes are monosomic for genes in the lost short arm and triso- mic for the genes present in the long arm of the X chromosome. MARKER AND RING CHROMOSOMES Marker chromosomes are rare and are usually chromosome frag- ments that are too small to be identihed by conventional cytogenet- ics; they usually occur in addition to the normal complement of 46 chromosomes. Most are sporadic (70%); mosaicism is often (50%) noted because of the mitotic instability of the marker chromosomes. The incidence in newborn infants is 1 in 3,300, and the incidence in persons with intellectual disability is 1 in 300. The associated phe- notype ranges from normal to severely abnormal, depending on the amount of chromosome material and number of genes included in the fragment. Ring chromosomes, which are found for all human chromosomes, are rare. A ring chromosome is formed when both ends of a chromo- some are deleted and the ends are then joined to form a ring. Depend- ing on the amount of chromosome material that is lacking or in excess (if the ring has duplicated chromosomal material), a patient with a ring chromosome can appear normal or can have different degrees of intel- lectual disability and/or multiple congenital anomalies. Marker and ring chromosomes can be found in the cells of solid tumors of children. Some of these markers can be the result of tumor- specific rearrangements, such as translocations, deletions, and duplica- tions, ultimately leading to gene fusions and tumor gene amplifications. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 99.4 Sex Chromosome Aneuploidy Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee About 1 in 400 males and 1 in 650 females have some form of sex chromosome abnormality. Considered together, sex chromosome abnormalities are the most common chromosome abnormalities seen in liveborn infants, children, and adults. Sex chromosome abnormalities can be either structural or numerical and can be pres- ent in all cells or in a mosaic form. Those affected with these abnor- malities might have few or no physical or developmental problems (Table 99.7). TURNER SYNDROME Turner syndrome is a condition characterized by complete or partial monosomy of the X chromosome and defined by a combination of phenotypic features (see Table 99.7 and Table 99.8). Half the patients with Turner syndrome have a 45, chromosome complement. The other half exhibit mosaicism and varied structural abnormalities of the X or Y chromosome. Maternal age is not a predisposing factor for children with 45,X. Turner syndrome occurs in approximately 1 Table 99.7 Sex Chromosome Abnormalities DISORDER Klinefelter syndrome KARYOTYPE 47,XXY 48,XXXY Other (48,XXYY; 49,XXXYY; mosaics) 47,XYY APPROXIMATE INCIDENCE 1/580 males 1/50,000-1/80,000 male births 1/800-1,000 males 1/1,500 males XYY syndrome Other X or Y chromosome abnormalities XX males Turner syndrome Trisomy X 46,XX 45,X Variants and mosaics 47,XXX 48,XXXX and 49,XXXXX Other X chromosome abnormalities XY females 46,XY 1/20,000 males 1/2,500-1/5,000 females 1/1,000 females Rare 1/3,000 females 1/20,000 females 

Table 99.8 Signs Associated with Turner Syndrome Short stature Congenital lymphedema Horseshoe kidneys Patella dislocation Increased carrying angle of elbow (cubitus valgus) Madelung deformity (chondrodysplasia of distal radial epiphysis) Congenital hip dislocation Scoliosis Widespread nipples Shield chest Redundant nuchal skin (in utero cystic hygroma) Low posterior hairline Coarctation of aorta Bicuspid aortic valve Cardiac conduction abnormalities Hypoplastic left heart syndrome and other left-sided heart abnormalities Gonadal dysgenesis (infertility, primary amenorrhea Gonadoblastoma (increased risk if Y chromosome material is present) Learning disabilities (nonverbal perceptual motor and visuospatial skills) (in 70%) Developmental delay (in 10%) Social awkwardness Hypothyroidism (acquired in 15-30%) Type 2 diabetes mellitus (insulin resistance) Strabismus Cataracts Red-green color blindness (as in males) Recurrent otitis media Sensorineural hearing loss Inflammatory bowel disease Celiac disease (increased incidence) in 5,000 female live births. In 75% of patients, the lost sex chromo- some is of paternal origin (whether an X or a Y). 45,X is one of the chromosome abnormalities most often associated with spontaneous pregnancy losses. It has been estimated that 95-99% of 45,X concep- tions are miscarried. Clinical findings in the newborns can include small size for ges- tational age, webbing of the neck, protruding ears, and lymphedema of the hands and feet, although many newborns are phenotypically normal (Fig. 99.10). Older children and adults have short stature and exhibit variable dysmorphic features. Congenital heart defects (40%) and structural renal anomalies (60%) are common. The most common heart defects are bicuspid aortic valves, coarctation of the aorta, aortic stenosis, and mitral valve prolapse. The gonads are generally streaks of fibrous tissue (gonadal dysgenesis) (see Chap- ter 626). There is primary amenorrhea and lack of secondary sex characteristics. These children should receive regular endocrino- Patients with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism can have Turner syndrome, although this form of mosaicism can also be associated with male pseudohermaphroditism, male or female genitalia in association with mixed gonadal dysgenesis, or a normal male phenotype. This variant is estimated to represent approximately 6% of patients with mosaic Turner syndrome. Some of the patients with Turner syndrome pheno- type and a Y cell line exhibit masculinization. Phenotypic females with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism have a 15-30% risk of developing gonadoblas- toma. The risk for the patients with a male phenotype and external Chapter 99 • Chromosome Disorders 771 testes is not so high, but tumor surveillance is nevertheless recom- mended. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has recom- mended the use of FISH analysis to look for Y chromosome mosaicism in all 45,X patients. If Y chromosome material is identified, laparo- scopic gonadectomy is recommended. Noonan syndrome (see Chapter 101.1) shares many clinical features with Turner syndrome and was formerly called pseudo-Turner syn- drome, although it is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from pathogenic variants in several genes involved in the RAS-MAPK path- way. In contrast to Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome affects both sexes and has a different pattern of congenital heart disease, typically involving right-sided heart lesions. KLINEFELTER SYNDROME Persons with Klinefelter syndrome are phenotypically male. This syndrome is the most common cause of hypogonadism and infer- tility in males and the most common sex chromosome aneuploidy in humans (see Chapter 623). Eighty percent of children with Klinefelter syndrome have a male karyotype with an extra chromo- some X-47,XXY. The remaining 20% have multiple sex chromo- some aneuploidies (48,XXXY; 48,XXYY; 49,XXXXY), mosaicism (46,XY/47,XXY), or structurally abnormal X chromosomes; the greater the aneuploidy, the more severe the mental impairment and dysmorphism. The prevalence of 47,XXY is 1 in 580 liveborn males. Errors in paternal nondisjunction in meiosis I account for ~50% of The incidence of 47,XYY is approximately 1 in 800-1,000 males, with many cases remaining undiagnosed, because most affected individu- als have a normal appearance and normal fertility. The extra Y is the result of nondisjunction at paternal meiosis II. Those with this abnor- mality have normal intelligence but are at risk for learning disabilities. Behavioral abnormalities, including hyperactive behavior, pervasive developmental disorder, and aggressive behavior, have been reported. Early reports that assigned stigmata of criminality to this disorder have long been disproved. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health. Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 99.5 Mosaicism Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee Mosaicism describes an individual or tissue that contains ≥2 geneti- cally different cell lines typically derived from a single zygote. Genetic differences can result from mitotic nondisjunction (see Fig. 99.1; Table 99.9) or sporadic variant. Study of placental tissue from chorionic villus samples collected at or before the 10th week of ges- tation has shown that ≥2% of all conceptions are mosaic for a chro- mosome abnormality. With the exception of chromosomes 13, 18, and 21, complete autosomal trisomies are usually nonviable, and the contribution of a normal cell line might allow these other trisomic conceptions to survive to term. Depending on the point at which the new cell line arises during early embryogenesis, mosaicism may be present in some tissues but not in others. Germline mosaicism, which refers to the presence of mosaicism in the germ cells of the gonad, may be associated with an increased risk for recurrence of an affected child if the germ cells are affected with a chromosomal abnormality or with a specific gene pathogenic variant. PALLISTER-KILLIAN SYNDROME Pallister-Killian syndrome is characterized by coarse facies (promi- nent full cheeks), abnormal ear lobes, localized alopecia (sparse hair 

772 Part VIII • Human Genetics 20090 C D Fig. 99.10 Physical manifestations associated with Turner syndrome. A, This newborn shows a webbed neck with low hairline, shield chest with widespread nipples, abnormal ears, and micrognathia. B, The low-set posterior hairline can be better appreciated in this older child, who also has protruding ears. C, In this frontal view, mild webbing of the neck and small, widely spaced nipples are evident, along with a midline scar from prior cardiac surgery. The ears are low-set and prominent, protruding forward. D and E, The newborn shown in A also has prominent lymphedema of the hands and feet. (From Madan-Khetarpal S, Arnold G. Genetic disorders and dysmorphic conditions. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, eds, Zitelli and Davis' Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012: Fig. 1.25.) in the temporal regions), pigmentary skin anomalies, diaphrag- matic hernia, cardiovascular anomalies, supernumerary nipples, seizures, and profound intellectual disability. The syndrome is caused by mosaicism for an isochromosome of the short chromo- some of 12 (12p). The presence of the isochromosome 12p in cells gives four functional copies for the short arm of chromosome 12 in the affected cells. The isochromosome 12p is preferentially cultured from fibroblasts that can be readily obtained from a skin punch biopsy and is seldom present in lymphocytes. A CMA obtained from a buccal swab can be another tool to detect this disorder. The abnormalities seen in affected persons probably reflect the presence of abnormal cells during early embryogenesis. HYPOMELANOSIS OF ITO Hypomelanosis of Ito is characterized by unilateral or bilateral macular hypo- or hyperpigmented whorls, streaks, and patches (see Chapter 694). Sometimes these pigmentary defects follow the lines of Blaschko that represent areas of early epidermal cell migration. Hair and tooth anomalies are common. Abnormalities of the eyes, musculoskeletal system (growth asymmetry, syndactyly, polydactyly, cindatal disabite may nerve preten. (anierosephaly pinues, nosis of Ito might have two genetically distinct cell lines. The mosaic chromosome anomalies that have been observed involve both auto- somes and sex chromosomes and have been demonstrated in about 

Table 99.9 DISORDER Trisomy 8 Trisomy 9 Trisomy 16 Tetrasomy 12р Other Rare Mosaic Aneuploidy Syndromes KARYOTYPE CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS 47,XX/XY, +8 Variable growth and intellectual deficiency The majority of patients are mosaic Deep palmar and plantar furrows Joint contractures 47,XX/XY,+9 47,XX/XY, +16 46, XX[12/46,XX, +i(12p)(8) (mosaicism for an isochromosome 12p) The majority of patients are mosaic Craniofacial (high forehead, microphthalmia, low-set malformed ears, bulbous nose) Skeletal (joint contractures) Heart defects (60%) The most commonly observed autosomal aneuploidy in spontaneous abortion Recurrence risk negligible Pallister-Killian syndrome Sparse anterior scalp hair (more so temporal region), eyebrows, and eyelashes; prominent forehead; full cheeks; long philtrum with thin upper lip and cupid-bow configuration; polydactyly; streaks of hyper- and hypopigmentation 50% of clinically affected patients. The mosaicism might not be vis- ible in lymphocyte-derived chromosome studies; it is more likely to be found when chromosomes are analyzed from skin fibroblasts. The distinct cell lines might not always be caused by observable chromo- somal anomalies but might result from single-gene pathogenic vari- ants or other mechanisms. 99.6 Chromosome Instability Syndromes Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee Chromosome instability syndromes, formerly known as chromosome inheritance and have an increased frequency of chromosome break- age and/or rearrangement, either spontaneous or induced. Chromo- some instability syndromes result from specific defects in DNA repair, cell cycle control, and apoptosis. The resulting chromosomal instabil- ity leads to the increased risk of developing neoplasms. The classic chromosome instability syndromes are Fanconi anemia, ataxia telan- giectasia, Nijmegen syndrome, ICF (immunodeficiency, centromere instability, facial anomalies) syndrome, Roberts syndrome, and Bloom syndrome (Table 99.10). Chapter 99 • Chromosome Disorders 773 99.7 Uniparental Disomy and Imprinting Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee UNIPARENTAL DISOMY Uniparental disomy (UPD) occurs when both chromosomes of a pair or areas from one chromosome in any individual have been inherited from a single parent. UPD can be of two types, unipa- rental isodisomy or uniparental heterodisomy. Uniparental isodi- somy means that both chromosomes or chromosomal regions are identical (typically the result of monosomy rescue by duplication). Uniparental heterodisomy means that the two chromosomes are different members of a pair, both of which were still inherited from one parent. This results from a trisomy that is later reduced to disomy, leaving two copies from one parent. The phenotypic result of UPD varies according to the chromosome involved, the parent who contributed the chromosomes, and whether it is isodisomy or heterodisomy. Three types of phenotypic effects are seen in UPD: those related to imprinted genes (i.e., the absence of a gene that is normally expressed only when inherited from a parent of a specific sex), those related to the uncovering of autosomal recessive disor- ders, and those related to a vestigial aneuploidy producing mosa- icism (see Chapter 97). In uniparental isodisomy, both chromosomes or regions (and thus the genes) in the pair are identical. This is particularly impor- tant when the parent is a carrier of an autosomal recessive disor- der. If the offspring of a carrier parent has UPD with isodisomy for a chromosome that carries an abnormal gene, the abnormal gene will be present in two copies, and the phenotype will be that of the autosomal recessive disorder; the child has an autosomal recessive disorder even though only one parent is a carrier of that reces- sive disorder. It is estimated that all humans carry approximately 20 abnormal autosomal recessive genes. Some autosomal recessive disorders, such as spinal muscular atrophy, cystic fibrosis, cartilage- hair hypoplasia, a- and B-thalassemias, and Bloom syndrome, have been reported in cases of UPD. The possibility of uniparental isodi- somy should also be considered when a person is affected with >1 recessive disorder because the abnormal genes for both disorders could be carried on the same isodisomic chromosome. Uniparental isodisomy is a rare cause of recessively inherited disorders. Unipa- rental isodisomies can also be detected by SNP microarrays. Maternal UPD involving chromosomes 2, 7, 14, and 15 and pater- nal UPD involving chromosomes 6, 11, 15, and 20 are associated with phenotypic abnormalities of growth and behavior. UPD of maternal chromosome 7 is associated with Russell-Silver syndrome with intra- uterine growth restriction. These phenotypic effects may be related to imprinting (see later) (Fig. 99.11). Although microdeletions cause the majority of cases, UPD for chromosome 15 is seen in some instances of Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome. In Prader-Willi syndrome, approxi- mately 25-29% of cases have maternal UPD (missing the paternal chromosome 15) (Fig. 99.12). In Angelman syndrome, paternal UPD of chromosome 15 is only observed in approximately 5% of the cases (missing the maternal chromosome 15). The phenotype for Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome in cases of UPD is thought to result from the lack of specific parental contribu- tions from chromosome 15. In Prader-Willi syndrome the paternal contribution is missing, and the maternal contribution is missing in Angelman syndrome. Prader-Willi syndrome may be caused by paternal deficiency of a cluster of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs). 

774 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 99.10 SYNDROME Fanconi anemia (FA) Ataxia telangiectasia Nijmegen syndrome Chromosome Instability Syndromes LABORATORY FINDINGS AND GENES INVOLVED CLINICAL FINDINGS Chromosome breakage induced by diepoxybutane and Short statue ming termal in a of gas, yaolial na, defects including thumb anomalies, pancytopenia, There are least 21 FA genes, most are autosomal skeletal anomalies, renal anomalies, café-au-lait recessive, only one is X linked macules, ear abnormalities and hearing loss Chromosome instability with rearrangements between Progressive cerebellar ataxia with later development chromosomes 7 and 14 in lymphocytes often involving of conjunctival telangiectasias, choreoathetosis, the T-cell receptors in those chromosomes and dystonia Decreased IgA levels Sinopulmonary infections Pathogenic variants in the ATM gene. Autosomal Predisposition to malignancies like B-cell recessive lymphomas, T-cell leukemias and solid tumors Translocations involving chromosomes 7 and 14 in up to IUGR, short stature, progressive microcephaly, and 50% of cells intellectual disability, recurrent sinopulmonary Pathogenic variants in the NBN gene (autosomal intections recessive Susceptibility to malignancies before age 20 years like T- and B-cell lymphomas, medulloblastomas, gliomas, rhabdomyosarcoma Immunodeficiency, recurrent infections, intellectual disability, facial dysmorphic features ICF (immunodeficiency, centromere instability, facial anomalies) syndrome, types I and Il Roberts-SC phocomelia syndrome Bloom syndrome Werner syndrome Pericentromeric chromosomal instability on PHA- stimulated metaphases in chromosomes 1, 9, and 16 Decrease of IgG and IgE in type I, IgM and IgE in type Il Low T cells, like NK cells. Pathogenic variants in DNMT3B and ZBTB24 genes in types I and II, respectively Autosomal recessive Premature chromosome separation with chromatid/ centromere repulsion in prophase or early metaphase easily detected using C-banding Pathogenic variants in ESCO2 gene Autosomal recessive Marked chromosomal increase of sister chromatid exchange in the presence of BrdU and increased spontaneous chromosome breakage Decreased IgG, IgA, IgM Pathogenic variants in the RECQL3 gene. Autosomal recessive "Variegated translocation mosaicism": chromosomal aberrations, including translocations, inversions, and deletions Telomere loss Pathogenic variants in RECQL2 Autosomal recessive Prenatal growth deficiency, absent or hypoplastic arms typically symmetric with reduction of digits' length including thumbs that are usually more affected than lower extremities, bilateral cleft lip and palate, dysmorphic features, cardiac anomalies, renal anomalies, and intellectual disability Severe prenatal and postnatal growth deficiency, microcephaly (average intelligence), sensitivity to sunlight (butterfly distribution over the face), cafe- au-lait macules, insulin resistance, predisposition to malignancies: lymphomas, leukemias, squamous cell carcinoma and solid tumors Hypersensitivity to chemotherapy Short stature, premature aging appearance, and predisposition to malignancies Loss and graying of hair, hoarseness, scleroderma- Cataracts, type Il diabetes, osteoporosis, hypo- Neoplasms in >40% of cases including sarcomas, melanomas, and thyroid cancer Myocardial infarction and malignancies are cause of IUGR, Intrauterine growth restriction; PHA, phytohemagglutinin; NK, natural killer. These findings suggest that there are differences in function of cer- tain regions of chromosome 15, depending on whether it is inher- ited from the mother or from the father. Angelman syndrome is caused by absent function of the maternal gene UBE3A and can be the result of maternal deletion, maternal UBE3A pathogenic vari- ant, paternal UPD, and abnormalities in the maternal imprinting center on chromosome 15q11-13 region. UPD most frequently arises when a pregnancy starts off as a trisomic conception followed by trisomy rescue. Because most trisomies are lethal, the fetus can only survive if a cell line loses one of the extra chromosomes to revert to the disomic state. One third of the time, the disomic cell line is uniparental. This is the typical mechanism for Prader-Willi syndrome, and it is often asso- ciated with advanced maternal age. The embryo starts off as tri- somy 15 secondary to maternal meiosis I nondisjunction, followed by random loss of the paternal chromosome. In this case the diso- mic cell line becomes the more viable one and outgrows the triso- mic cell line. When mosaic trisomy is found at prenatal diagnosis, care should be taken to determine whether UPD has resulted and whether the chromosome involved is one of the disomies known to be associated with phenotypic abnormalities (i.e., chromosome involved in i some reing in cited ears) Thee are palisent in some tissues, leading to malformations or dysfunction. The 

Chapter 99 • Chromosome Disorders 775 Pseudohypopara- thyroidism Ib Frequency: ? #20q13.2 parathormone resistance, hypoglycemia,... Wang syndrome Frequency: ? #14q32 IUGR, ID, polyhydramnios, bell-shaped thorax,... Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus 1:400,000 #6q24 IUGR, transient neonatal diabetes, omphalocele, macroglossia Beckwith-Wiedemann/ EMG syndrome 1:13,700 #11p15 Exomphalos, macroglossia, gigantism, Increased tumor risk Silver-Russell syndrome 1:10,000-30,000 #7q32, 11p15 Growth retardation, rel. macrocephaly, triangular face, asymmetry,... Overlapping Features - Aberrant growth - Asymmetry - Hypo/nyaraisemia - Neonatal hypotonia - Feeding difficulties Angelman syndrome 1:16,000 #15q11q13 Severe ID, ataxia, epilepsy, absent speech,.. Common Molecular Findings - (Epi)variants - MLMDs General Findings in IDs - Non-mendelian inheritance - Discordant monozygotic twins - Environmental contribution Prader-Willi syndrome 1:17,500 #15q11q13 Growth retardation, ID, hypotonia, obesity/hyperphagia,... Temple syndrome Frequency: ? #14q32 Growth retardation, ID, scoliosis, obesity, precocious puberty,... Fig. 99.11 Overview of the common clinical and molecu- lar findings in the eight known and major chromosomal localiza- tion. #6q24, Chromosome 6q24; EMG, exomphalos-macroglossia- growth restriction; ID, intellec- tual disability; MLMDs, multilocus methylation defects. (From Egg- ermann T, Elbracht M, Schröder C, et al. Congenital imprinting disorders: a novel mechanism seemingly unrelated dis- orders. J Pediatr. 2013;163:1204.) C B D Fig. 99.12 Prader-Willi phenotype. A and B, Individual showing morbid obesity with facial features as shown. C, Upper extremities are notable for small hands relative to body size. D, External genitalia after laparoscopic orchiopexy at 13 months. Parental informed consent, as approved by the Baylor College of Medicine Institutional Review Board, was obtained to publish the photographs. (From Sahoo T, del Gaudio D, German JR, et al. Prader-Willi phenotype caused by paternal deficiency for the HBII-85 C/D box small nucleolar RNA cluster. Nat Genet. 2008;40:719-721.) 

776 Part VIII • Human Genetics 100e Fig. 99.13 In this hypothetical pedigree suggestive of imprinting, phenotypic effects occur only when the mutated gene is transmitted from the mother, but not when it is transmitted from the father, that is, maternal deficiency. Equal numbers of males and females can be affected and not affected phenotypi- cally in each generation. A nonmanitesting transmitter gives a clue to the sex of the parent who passes the expressed genetic information; that is, in maternal maternd deficidey Salso as Ange man an ome afe the perse "s done producifesting females. This is theoretical, because in most clinical scenarios of i transmitted the the fat pediges gestive sited to deficie mother Eral mumbing, mens and effects can on late and not at ced prety all it an eatin; that s, th pratical situationy falo notesting transmitter giving, e to the sex of the parmanto as ms on tha real-life clinical cases of Prader-Willi syndrome, affected persons do not reproduce. Table 99.11 Consensus Diagnostic Criteria for Prader-Willi Syndrome 1 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 10 11 MAJOR CRITERIA (1 POINT EACH) Neonatal/infantile hypotonia Feeding problems and failure to thrive as an infant Weight gain at 1-6 years; obesity; hyperphagia Characteristic dysmorphic facial features Small genitalia; pubertal delay and insufficiency Developmental delay/intellectual disability MINOR CRITERIA (1/2 POINT EACH) Decreased fetal movement and infantile lethargy Typical behavior problems Sleep apnea Short stature for family by 15 years Hypopigmentation for the family Small hands and feet for height Narrow hands, straight ulnar border Esotropia, myopia Thick, viscous saliva Speech articulation defects Skin picking From Cassidy SB, Schwartz S, Miller JL, Driscoll DJ. Prader-Willi syndrome. Genet Med. 2012;14(1):15. Table 2. 

Chapter 99 • Chromosome Disorders 777 Table 99.12 PHASE 0 1a 1b 2a 2b 3 4 Nutritional Phases in Prader-Willi Syndrome MEDIAN AGES CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS Prenatal to birth Decreased fetal movements and lower birthweight than siblings 0-9 mo Hypotonia with difficulty feeding and decreased appetite 9-25 mo Improved feeding and appetite and growing appropriately 2.1-4.5 yr Weight increasing without appetite increase or excess calories 4.5-8 yr Increased appetite and calories, but can feel full 8 yr to adulthood Hyperphagic, rarely feels full Adulthood Appetite is no longer insatiable Modified from Miller JL, Lynn CH, Driscoll DC, etal. Nutritional phases in Prader-Willi syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2011;155A: 1040-1049. Table 99.13 15g11-13 deletion Uniparental disomy Single-gene pathogenic variants Molecular Mechanisms Causing Prader-Willi and Angelman Syndromes PRADER-WILLI SYNDROME ~70% (paternal) ~30% (maternal) None detected ANGELMAN SYNDROME ~70% (maternal) ~5% (paternal) UBE3A gene encoding the E6-AP ubiquitin-protein ligase (11% of total but mostly in familial cases) Imprinting center pathogenic variants 5% 1% Unidentified <1% 10-15% Data from Nicholls RD, Knepper JL. Genome organization, function and imprinting in Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2001;2:153-175; and Horsthemke B, Buiting K. Imprinting defects on human chromosome 15. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;113:292-299. presence of aggregates of trisomic cells might account for the spec- trum of abnormalities seen in persons with some UPDs. IMPRINTING Genomic imprinting occurs when the phenotypic expression of a gene depends on the parent of origin for certain genes or chromosome regions. Whether the genetic material is expressed or not depends on the sex of the parent from whom it was derived. Genomic imprinting can be suspected in some cases on the basis of a pedigree. In these pedi- gres the dis site it a lovays tea mira from the same sit ased could. 99.13 and 99.14). Imprinting probably occurs in many different parts of the human genome and is thought to be particularly important in gene expression related to development, growth, cancer, and behavior; >60 genes have been classified as imprintable. Imprinting disorders may arise from UPD, deletions or duplications, epigenetic aberrant meth- ylation patterns, or single nucleotide pathogenic variants in a specific gene. A classic example of imprinting disorder is seen in Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome, two very different clinical condi- tions. These syndromes are both commonly caused by a deletion of the same region in the proximal long arm of chromosome 15. A deletion of the paternally derived chromosome causes Prader-Willi syndrome, in which the maternally derived copy is still intact, for which some of the imprinted genes within this region normally remain silent. Prader- Willi syndrome can be diagnosed clinically (Table 99.11) and con- firmed with genetic testing. Additional clinical features and issues of weight gain are noted in Table 99.12. The weight gain is difficult to con- trol, but treatment with growth hormone has resulted in improvements in height, lean body mass, decreased adipose tissue, and improvement in cognitive function. A maternal deletion of the same region as in Prader-Willi syndrome causes Angelman syndrome, leaving intact the paternal copy that in this case has genes that are also normally silent. In other situations, UPD can lead to the same diagnosis (Table 99.13). Many other disor- ders are associated with this type of parent-of-origin effect, as in some cases of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (see Chapter 598.1), Russell- Silver syndrome, and neonatal diabetes. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

778 Part VIII • Human Genetics Chapter 100 Dysmorphology, Phenotyping, and Sequences Anne M. Slavotinek Dysmorphology is the study of differences in human form and the mechanisms that cause them. It has been estimated that 1 in 40 new- borns, or 2.5%, have a recognizable birth defect or pattern of mal- formations at birth; ~50% of these newborns have a single, isolated malformation, whereas in the other half, multiple malformations are present. About 20-30% of infant deaths and 30-50% of deaths after the neonatal period are caused by congenital abnormalities (http://ww w.marchofdimes.com/peristats/). In 2021, birth defects accounted for ~1 in 5 infant deaths in the United States, with a rate of 108.2 deaths per 100,000 live births, which was higher than other causes of mor- tality, such as preterm/low birthweight (80.4/100,000), sudden infant death syndrome (39.8/100,000), maternal complications of pregnancy (33.4/100,000), and unintentional injury (33.5/100,000). CLASSIFICATION OF BIRTH DEFECTS Birth defects can be subdivided into isolated (single) defects or multiple defects, typically described as multiple congenital anomalies (MCAs). An isolated primary detect can be classihed, according to the presumed cause of the detect, as a malformation, dysplasia, deformation, or dis- ruption (Table 100.1 and Fig. 100.1). Most birth defects are malforma- tions, a term used interchangeably with anomalies. A malformation is a structural defect arising from a localized error in morphogenesis that results in the abnormal formation of a tissue or organ. Dysplasia refers to the abnormal organization of cells into tissues. Malformations and dysplasias can both affect the intrinsic structure of tissues and organs. In contrast, a deformation is an alteration in the shape or form of a structure or organ that has previously developed or differentiated nor- mally. A disruption is a defect resulting from the destruction of a struc- ture that had formed normally before the insult. Most human disorders with altered morphogenesis display multiple anomalies or malformations rather than an isolated birth defect. When several malformations coexist in a single individual, they can be classi- fied as a syndrome, sequence, or an association. A syndrome is defined as a pattern comprising multiple anomalies that are related by patho- physiology, resulting from a single, defined etiology. Sequences consist of multiple anomalies that are caused by a single event, although the sequence itself can have different etiologies. An association refers to a nonrandom grouping of anomalies in which there is an unclear, or unknown, relationship among the anomalies, such that they do not fit the criteria for a syndrome or sequence. Malformations and Dysplasias Human anomalies and dysplasias can be caused by pathogenic gene variants, chromosome aberrations and copy number variants, envi- ronmental factors, or interactions between genetic and environ- mental factors (Table 100.2). Some malformations are caused by deleterious sequence variants in single genes, whereas other anomalies arise because of deleterious sequence variants in multiple genes acting in combination, termed digenic or oligogenic inheritance. In the past, it was thought that malformations were caused by monogenic patho- genic variants in 7.5% of patients; chromosomal anomalies in 6%; mul- tigenic pathogenic variants in 20%; and known environmental factors, such as maternal diseases, infections, and teratogens, in 6-7% (Table 100.3). In the remaining 60-70% of patients, malformations were clas- sified as having an unknown etiology. Currently, the percentages have increased for all of the possible genetic etiologies of malformations due to improved cytogenetic and molecular genetic methods, includ- ing microarrays and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays for detecting copy number variants, and next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies, such as exome or genome sequencing, for identi- fying novel genes and pathogenic sequence variants. Many developmental abnormalities caused by pathogenic sequence variants in a single gene display characteristic of mende- lian patterns of inheritance such as autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked inheritance. Genes that cause birth defects or MCA syndromes are often transcription factors, part of evolu- tionarily conserved signal transduction pathways, or regulatory proteins required for key developmental events (see Chapters 101 and 102 and Table 100.2). In addition, syndromes with MCA can be caused by chromosomal aberrations or copy number variants and teratogens (see Tables 100.2 and 100.3). Down syndrome typically results from an extra copy of an entire chromosome 21 or, less frequently, an extra copy of the Down syndrome critical region on chromosome 21. Chromosome 21 is a small chromosome that contains an estimated 250 genes, and thus individuals with Down syndrome typically have an increased dosage Table 100.1 Mechanisms, Terminology, and Definitions of Dysmorphology TERMINOLOGY Sequence DEFINITION EXAMPLE Single error in morphogenesis that results Pierre-Robin sequence, in which a small jaw results in glossoptosis and in a series of subsequent defects cleft palate 22q11 deletion sequence of primary fourth brachial arch and third and fourth pharyngeal pouch detects, leading to aplasia or hypoplasia of the thymus and parathyroid glands, aortic arch anomalies, and micrognathia 22q11 deletion Mechanical (uterine) force that alters structure of intrinsically normal tissue Oligohydramnios produces deformations by in utero compression of limbs (e.g., dislocated hips, equinovarus foot deformity), crumpled ears, or small thorax Disruption sequence Dysplasia sequence In utero tissue destruction after a period of normal morphogenesis Atypical organization of cells into tissues or organs Amnionic membrane rupture sequence, leading to amputation of fingers/ toes, tissue fibrosis, and tissue bands Neurocutaneous melanosis sequence, with atypical migration of melanocyte precursor cells from the neural crest to the periphery, manifesting as melanocytic hamartomas of skin and meninges Malformation syndrome Appearance of multiple malformations in unrelated tissues that have a known, unifying cause Trisomy 21 Teratogens Numerous multiple congenital anomaly syndromes as described above From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004. 

Chapter 100 • Dysmorphology, Phenotyping, and Sequences 779 B C D Fig. 100.1 Four major types of problems in morphogenesis: malformation, deformation, disruption, and dysplasia. A, Infant with campomelic dys- plasia syndrome, which results in multiple anomalies caused by a pathogenic variant in SOX9. B, Infant with oligohydramnios deformation sequence caused by premature rupture of membranes from 17 weeks' gestation until birth at 36 weeks; the infant was delivered from a persistent transverse lie. C, Fetus with early amnion rupture sequence with attachment of the placenta to the head and resultant disruption of craniofacial structures with distal limb contractures. D, Infant with diastrophic dysplasia caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in a sulfate transporter protein. (From Graham Jr JM. Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Deformation, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007, Fig. 1-1, p. 4.) for the genes encoded by this chromosome that causes their physical differences (see Chapter 57). Neural tube defects (NTDs) are an example of a birth defect that typically displays multifactorial inheritance. NTDs and other birth defects, such as cleft lip and palate, can recur in families, but inheritance for the majority of affected individuals does not fol- low a straightforward, mendelian inheritance pattern, and multiple genes and environmental factors acting together likely contribute to the pathogenesis (see Table 100.2). Many of the genes involved in NTDs are unknown, so one cannot predict with certainty the mode of inheritance or a precise recurrence risk for an individual case. Empirical recurrence risks can be provided on the basis of popu- lation studies and the presence of single or multiple family mem- bers with the same malformation. However, one important gene/ environment interaction has been identified for NTDs (see Chapter 631.1). Folic acid deficiency is associated with NTDs and can result from a combination of dietary factors and increased utilization dur- ing pregnancy. A common variant in the gene for an enzyme in the folate recycling pathway, 5,10-methylene-tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), that makes this enzyme less stable, may also be impor- tant in folic acid status. Several teratogenic causes of birth defects have been described (see Tables 100.2 and 100.3). Ethanol causes a recognizable pattern of anomalies that is variably called tetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), or fetal alcohol effects (FAE) (see Chapter 146). Children who were exposed to ethanol during the pregnancy can display microcephaly, develop- mental delays, hyperactivity, and facial anomalies. Ethanol, which is toxic to the developing central nervous system (CNS), causes cell death in developing neurons. Deformations Many deformations involve the musculoskeletal system (Fig. 100.2). Fetal movement is required for the proper development of the mus- culoskeletal system, and restriction of fetal movement can result in musculoskeletal deformations, such as clubfoot, or talipes. Two major intrinsic etiologies of deformations are primary neuromuscular dis- orders and oligohydramnios, or decreased amniotic fluid, which can be caused by fetal renal defects. Both primary neuromuscular disorders and oligohydramnios can compromise fetal movements. The major extrinsic causes of deformations are those that result in fetal crowding and restriction of fetal movement. Examples of extrinsic causes include oligohydramnios resulting from chronic leakage of amniotic fluid, and abnormal shape of the amniotic cavity. When a fetus is in the breech position (Fig. 100.3), the incidence of deformations is increased 10- fold. The shape of the amniotic cavity also has a profound effect on the shape of the fetus and is influenced by many factors, including uterine shape and the volume of amniotic fluid (Fig. 100.4). It is important to determine whether deformations result from intrin- sic or extrinsic causes. Most children with deformations from extrinsic causes are otherwise completely normal, and their prognosis is usually excellent. Correction typically occurs spontaneously. Deformations caused by intrinsic factors, such as multiple joint contractures result- ing from CNS or peripheral nervous system defects, have a different prognosis and may be much more significant for the child (Fig. 100.5). Disruptions Disruptions are caused by destruction of a previously normally formed organ or body part. At least two mechanisms are known to produce disruptions. One involves entanglement followed by tearing apart, or amputation, of a normally developed structure, usually a digit or limb, by strands of amnion floating within amniotic fluid that are termed amni- otic bands (Fig. 100.6). The other mechanism involves interruption to the blood supply to a developing body part, which can lead to infarction, necrosis, and resorption of structures distal to the insult. If interrup- tion to the blood supply occurs early in gestation, the disruptive defect typically involves atresia, or absence of a body part. Genetic factors have been considered to play a minor role in the pathogenesis of disruptions, as most occur as sporadic events in otherwise healthy individuals, but little is known regarding etiology. The prognosis for a disruptive defect is determined entirely by the extent and location of the tissue loss. Multiple Anomalies: Sequences, Associations, and Syndromes The pattern of multiple anomalies that occurs when a single primary defect in early development produces multiple anomalies because of a cascade of secondary and tertiary developmental effects is called a sequence (Fig. 100.7). When evaluating a child with MCAs, the physi- cian must differentiate between multiple anomalies that are caused by a single localized error in morphogenesis (a sequence) from syndromes with multiple anomalies. In the former, recurrence risk counseling for the multiple anomalies depends entirely on the risk of recurrence for the single, localized malformation. Pierre-Robin sequence is a pattern of multiple anomalies produced by mandibular hypoplasia. Because the tongue is relatively large for the oral cavity, it drops back (glossop- tosis), blocking closure of the posterior palatal shelves and causing a U-shaped cleft palate. There are numerous causes of mandibular hypo- plasia, all of which can result in the characteristic features of Pierre- Robin sequence. VATER association was first defined as the nonrandom occurrence of a combination of congenital anomalies comprising vertebral defects, 

780 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 100.2 Examples of Malformations with Distinct Causes, Clinical Features, and Pathogenesis DISORDER Spondylocostal dysostosis syndrome Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome CAUSE/INHERITANCE SELECTED CLINICAL FEATURES Mendelian; autosomal recessive Abnormal vertebral and rib segmentation Autosomal dominant Intellectual disability Broad thumbs and halluces; PATHOGENESIS Delete and oger ge variants in Deleterious sequence variants in CBP and EP300 valgus deviation of these digits Hypoplastic maxillae Prominent nose and columella Congenital heart disease X-linked lissencephaly X-linked Male: severe intellectual disability, Deleterious sequence variants in seizures DCX Female: variable Aniridia Autosomal dominant Absent iris or iris/foveal hypoplasia Waardenburg syndrome, type | Autosomal dominant Deatness White forelock Deleterious sequence variants in PAX6 Deleterious sequence variants in PAX3 Wide-spaced eyes Iris heterochromia and/or pale skin pigmentation Holoprosencephaly Velocardiofacial syndrome Loss of function or haploinsufficiency for multiple genes Microdeletion 22q11.2 Microcephaly SHH, multiple other genes Cyclopia Single central incisor conduding honor discal defects Cleft palate T-cell defects Facial anomalies TBX1 haploinsufficiency/ pathogsuit wanay for other genes in the deleted interval also contributes to the phenotype Down syndrome Additional copy of chromosome 21 (trisomy 21) Intellectual disability Characteristic facial anomalies Increase in dosage of an estimated 250 genes on chromosome 21 Congenital heart disease Increased risk of leukemia Alzheimer disease Neural tube defects Multifactorial Meningomyelocele Fetal alcohol syndrome Teratogenic Retinoic acid embryopathy Teratogenic anal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) with esophageal atresia, radial anomalies, and renal dysplasia. The association was expanded to include cardiac anomalies (C) and limb anomalies (L), leading to the longer acronym, VACTERL. Although there are still no definitively established diagnostic criteria, most clinicians consider that a mini- mum of three of the seven component features must be present for the diagnosis. In addition, the designation of VATER/VACTERL associa- tion is typically one of exclusion; growth and developmental delays as well as facial anomalies are atypical and should prompt the consider- ation of alternative diagnoses. Anorectal defects and TEF are consid- ered more characteristic of VATER/VACTERL association than some of the other components, such as cardiac anomalies. A single umbili- cal artery is a common finding. The estimated incidence of VATER/ VACTERL has ranged from 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 40,000 infants. VAC- TERL with hydrocephalus, also known as VACTERL-H, is a separate VATER/VACTERL association has so far defied the identification of a simple mendelian etiology. Many cases are sporadic, although there are rare reports of familial inheritance and first-degree relatives with clinical findings in the component systems of VATER/VACTERL asso- ciation. Hedgehog signaling has been postulated to be important, as Defects in folate sensitive enzymes or folic acid uptake Microcephaly Ethanol toxicity to developing brain Developmental delay Facial anomalies Behavioral abnormalities Microtia Congenital heart disease Isotretinoin effects on neural crest and branchial arch development mouse models with defective Hedgehog and/or ciliary signaling mani- fest the clinical findings observed in VATER/VACTERL. However, cytogenetic studies have not demonstrated chromosome aberrations or copy number variants. Exome sequencing (ES) has not identified a sin- gle causative gene or gene family, although nonrecurrent variants have been described in mendelian disease genes, most typically in patients with renal involvement. Clinical overlap has led to the identification of pathogenic variants in the SALL1, SALL4, and MID genes in patients with anorectal malformations. Pathogenic variants in several autosomal recessive genes in the kynurenine pathway, including KYNU, HAAO, and NADSYN1, have been associated with a spectrum of anomalies that overlap with VATER/VACTERL association, including vertebral defects, cardiac anomalies, renal malformations, and limb defects of vari- able severity. Biallelic variants in these genes perturb the synthesis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) synthesis; these con- ditions have been grouped together as congenital NAD deficiency disorders. The overall contribution of these genes to the pathogen- esis of VATER/VACTERL association appears to be small in terms of the entire group of patients but remains an important diag- nostic consideration. Interestingly, studies in mice with biallelic 

Table 100.3 Causes of Congenital Malformations MONOGENIC X-linked hydrocephalus Achondroplasia Ectodermal dysplasia Apert syndrome Treacher Collins syndrome CHROMOSOMAL ABERRATIONS AND COPY NUMBER VARIANTS Trisomy 21, 18, 13 XO, XXY Deletions 4p-, 5p-, 7q-, 13q-, 18p-, 18q-, 22q- Prader-Willi syndrome (70% of affected patients have deletion of chromosome 15q11.2-q13) MATERNAL INFECTION Intrauterine infections (e.g., herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, rubella virus, Zika virus, toxoplasmosis) MATERNAL ILLNESS Diabetes mellitus Phenylketonuria Hyperthermia UTERINE ENVIRONMENT Deformation Uterine pressure, oligohydramnios: clubtoot, torticollis, congenital hip dislocation, pulmonary hypoplasia, seventh nerve palsy Disruption Amniotic bands, congenital amputations, gastroschisis, porencephaly, intestinal atresia Twinning ENVIRONMENTAL AGENTS Polychlorinated biphenyls Herbicides Mercury Alcohol MEDICATIONS Thalidomide Diethylstilbestrol Phenytoin Warfarin Cytotoxic drugs Paroxetine Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors Isotretinoin (vitamin A) D-Penicillamine Valproic acid Mycophenolate mofetil UNKNOWN ETIOLOGIES Neural tube defects, such as anencephaly and spina bifida Cleft lip/palate Pyloric stenosis SPORADIC SEQUENCE COMPLEXES VATER/VACTERL sequence (vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac defects, tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal atresia, radial and renal anomalies) Pierre-Robin sequence NUTRITIONAL Neural tube defects due to low folic acid From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson's Essentials of Pediatrics, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002. loss-of-function variants in Haao and Kynu that were provided with niacin in their diet showed that the vitamin can overcome the metabolic block associated with loss-of-function for these genes. Niacin enters the NAD biosynthesis pathway downstream to Haao and Kynu, and this finding implies that the availability of niacin and other components of the kynurenine pathway can influence NAD levels during pregnancy and consequently the clinical sever- ity resulting from the variants affecting some of the genes involved Chapter 100 • Dysmorphology, Phenotyping, and Sequences 781 Intrinsic Oligohydramnios Uterine hypertonia Multiple fetuses Urerine determities (bicornate) Uterine compression Extrinsic Small pelvis Bony lumbar spines Increased abdominal tone Abnormal fetal posture (including breech) Abnormal fetal muscular tone Increased mechanical forces Fetal constraint Deformations Craniofacial Scaphocephaly Plagiocephaly Mandibular asymmetry Flattened facies Deviated nasal septum Crumpled ear Craniosynostosis Extremity Other Dislocated hips Metatarsus adductus Equinovarus foot Calcaneovalgus foot Tibial bowing Hyperflexed hips Hyperextended knees Contractures Internal tibial torsion Torticollis Lung hypoplasia Scoliosis Fig. 100.2 Deformation abnormalities resulting from uterine com- pression. (From Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, Marcdante KJ, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2005.) Fig. 100.3 Breech deformation sequence. in NAD synthesis. These conditions outline the importance of con- sidering the influence of environmental factors on the phenotype caused by genetic variation. MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF MALFORMATIONS Inborn Errors of Development Genes that cause malformation syndromes, as well as genes whose expres- sion is disrupted by environmental agents or teratogens, can participate in numerous cellular processes, including signal transduction, transcription, or the regulation of genes and proteins required for key developmental events. When anomalies are viewed as alterations resulting from distur- bances to important developmental pathways, this provides a molecular framework for understanding the birth defects (see Chapter 101). 

782 Part VIII • Human Genetics Hindgut Cloaca Mesonephric duct Mesonephric ridge Normal development Ureteral bud Happens at about 31 days Defective development Renal agenesis Lack of urine into amniotic cavity Relative lack of amniotic fluid during fetal life Ureteral bud induces metanephric tissue to form renal parenchyma Pulmonary hypoplasia Death from respiratory insufficiency Altered facies Myo-neural dysfunction Amnion nodosum B Fetal compression Breech presentation Abnormal positioning of hands and feet Lack of amniotic fluid Intra-uterine constraint C Fig. 100.4 A, Consequences of renal agenesis. B, Multiple defor- mational defects. C, Detects in amnion nodosum; brown-yellow granules from vernix have been ribbed into defects of the amniot- ic surface. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 7th ed. Philadel- phia: Elsevier; 2013: p. 821.) Growth deficiency Pulmonary hypoplasia Fetal Akinesia Short umbilical cord Limb positional defects Facial anomalies B Fig. 100.6 A, Amniotic band disruption sequence. B, Bands constrict- ing the ankle leading to deformational defects and amputations. (From Jones KJ. Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006.) B D Fig. 100.5 A, Diagram demonstrating the etiologically heterogene- ous phenotype that results from fetal akinesia. B, Infant born with myo- tonic dystrophy to a mother with the same condition. He had multiple joint contractures with thin bones and respiratory insufficiency. C, Infant immobilized in a transverse lie after amnion rupture at 26 weeks. D, Fetus with bilateral renal agenesis resulting in oligohydramnios. (From Graham JL. Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2007: Fig. 47-2.) It is important to consider MCA syndromes as members of a group based on shared or overlapping clinical findings and related causative genes that act in the same developmental or metabolic pathway. See Chapter 101 for the Sonic Hedgehog disorders, RASopathies, cra- niosynostoses, and chromatin regulatory disorders as examples; dis- ruption of specific steps in this pathway result in a variety of related developmental disorders and anomalies (see Fig. 100.2). Cytogenetic Aberrations and Chromosomal Imbalance Cytogenetic imbalances resulting from an additional copy of a whole human chromosome can result in characteristic and recognizable 

Chapter 100 • Dysmorphology, Phenotyping, and Sequences 783 Neural plate Prechordal mesoderm Area of future face А Primary Defect in Prechordal Mesoderm Prior to 21-25 days Amniotic cavity Notochord - Heart Allantois- Yolk sac Mesencephalon Rhombencephalon Body stalk Prosencephalon 28 days 35 days Incomplete cleavage and morphogenesis of forebrain Missing or incomplete midfacial development Single ventricle Absence of corpus callosum Fused thalami Incomplete anterior and posterior pituitary Cleft lip Cleft palate Hypotelorism Lack of ethmoid bone Cyclopia Anophthalmia Microphthalmia Microcephaly Coloboma, iris Severe intellectual Retinal defect defect Apneic episodes Seizures Abnormal EEG Infant death Absent philtrum Absent nasal septum Single naris Proboscis C Lack of olfactory lobes Lack of optic nerve -ig. 100.7 Holoprosencephaly sequence. A, Schematic longitudinal section of 21-day embryo. B, Developmental pathogenesis of the sequence. C, Affected individual. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013: pp. 802-803.) syndromes. An additional copy of chromosome 21 results in Down syn- drome (see Chapter 57); loss of one of the X chromosomes results in Turner syndrome (see Chapter 99.2 for discussion of syndromes with whole chromosomal imbalances). With the advent of high-resolution cytogenetic techniques, such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH), and SNP arrays, it has become straightforward to identify submicroscopic chromosome deletions and duplications. Several recurrent chromosome deletions and duplications have been identified as the cause of characteristic and recog- nizable syndromes (see Table 100.6 and Chapter 99), including Williams syndrome (deletion of chromosome 7ql 1.23), Miller-Dieker syndrome (deletion of chromosome 17p13.3), Smith-Magenis syndrome (dele- tion of chromosome 17p11.2), and 22q11 deletion syndrome (deletion of chromosome 22q11.2, also known as velocardiofacial syndrome). Collectively, chromosome microarrays (CMAs) and genetic sequencing have made it possible to uncover rare microdeletions, microduplications, and single nucleotide pathogenic variants associated with birth defects, intellectual disability, and neuropsychiatric disorders. The sensitivity and specificity of microarrays made them a standard starting point for the evaluation of a child with MCAs and intellectual disabilities, but exome, genome, and gene panel testing have been preferred due to higher diag- nostic yield. It is important to note that unaffected individuals may carry small microdeletions and microduplications as part of familial variation. Therefore it is important to compare copy number variants that are identi- fied in children with birth defects or developmental delays with their par- ents' chromosome analyses and with databases of normal variants detected in individuals without such birth defects. against a broad and memorized (or computerized) knowledge of human disorders. This approach can be appropriate for experienced dysmorphologists and clinical geneticists. In conjunction, a systematic genetic mechanism approach can also be effective for clinicians who are not dysmorphology experts. By gathering and analyzing the clinical data, the general pediatrician can diagnose the patient in a straightfor- ward case or initiate a referral to an appropriate specialist. APPROACH TO THE CHILD WITH FACIAL ANOMALIES One approach to the child with facial anomalies is the pattern recogni- tion approach, which compares the physical differences in the patient Medical History The history for a patient with birth defects includes elements related to etiologic factors. The family history, or pedigree, is necessary to assess the inheritance pattern, or lack thereof, for a disorder. For disorders that have a simple mendelian inheritance pattern, recognition of the mode of inheritance can be critical for narrowing the differential diag- nosis, then prioritizing common genes with the appropriate inheritance pattern that could cause the patient's clinical features. Many common birth defects have a complex, or multifactorial, genetic etiology, such as isolated cleft palate and spina bifida or NTDs. The recognition of a close relative affected with a birth defect similar to the proband's find- ings can be useful. Typically, a three-generation pedigree is sufficient for this purpose (see Chapter 97). The perinatal history is also an essential component of the history. It includes the pregnancy history of the mother, which can be useful for recognition of recurrent miscarriages that may be indicative of a chromosomal disorder, factors that may relate to deformations or dis- ruptions such as oligohydramnios, and maternal exposures to terato- genic drugs or chemicals, including isotretinoin and ethanol, that are potential causes of microcephaly. Another component of the history that is often useful is the natural history of the phenotype. MCA syndromes caused by chromosomal aberrations and single-gene disorders are frequently static, meaning that, although the patients can experience new complications over 

784 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 100.4 SIGN Brachycephaly Brachydactyly Brushfield spots Camptodactyly Clinodactyly Hypoplastic or small nail Low-set ears Melia Wide-set eyes Plagiocephaly Posterior hair whorl Postaxial polydactyly Preaxial polydactyly Prominent lateral palatine ridges Scaphocephaly Shawl scrotum Short palpebral fissures Syndactyly Synophrys Telecanthus Widow's peak Definitions of Common Clinical Signs of Syndromes with Facial Anomalies DEFINITION A condition in which head shape is shortened from front to back along the sagittal plane; typically the back of the skull (occiput) and face are flatter than normal. Short digits. Speckled white spots or rings about two-thirds of the distance to the periphery of the iris of the eye. Permanent flexion of one or more fingers that can be associated with missing interphalangeal creases. A medial or lateral curving of the fingers or toes; usually refers to incurving of the fifth finger. A small nail on a digit. This designation is made when the helix meets the cranium at a level below a horizontal plane that is an extension of a line through both inner canthi. A suffix meaning "limb" (e.g., amelia, missing limb; brachymelia, short limb). Increased distance between the center of the pupils of the two eyes; can be measured as an increased interpupillary distance (IPD). A condition in which head shape is asymmetric in the sagittal or coronal plane; can result from asymmetry in cranial suture closure, asymmetry of brain growth, or deformation of the skull. A single hair whorl occurs to the right or left of midline and is within 2 cm anterior to the posterior fontanel in 95% of cases. Extra finger or toe present on the lateral side of the hand or foot. Extra finger or toe present on the medial side of the hand or foot. Relative overgrowth of the lateral palatine ridges that can be caused by a deficit of tongue thrust into the hard palate. A condition in which the head is elongated from front to back in the sagittal plane; most normal skulls are scaphocephalic; also termed dolichocephaly. The scrotal skin joins around the superior aspect of the penis and represents a mild deficit in full migration of the labial-scrotal folds. Decreased horizontal distance of the eyelid folds based on measurements from the inner canthus to the outer canthus. Incomplete separation of the fingers or toes. It most commonly occurs between the third and fourth fingers and between the second and third toes. Eyebrows that meet in the midline. Lateral displacement of the inner canthi. The inner canthal distance (ICD) is increased, but the IPD is normal. V-shaped midline, downward projection of the scalp hair in the frontal region. It represents an upper forehead intersection of the bilateral fields of periocular hair growth suppression. A widow's peak can occur together with wide-spaced eyes. time, the phenotype is typically not progressive. In contrast, disor- ders that cause facial anomalies because of metabolic perturbations, for example, Hunter syndrome or Sanfilippo syndrome, can be mild or may not be apparent at birth, but can progress, causing deterioration of patient status over time. Physical Examination The physical examination is very important for identifying anomalies that can aid a genetic diagnosis. The essential element of the physical evaluation is an assessment of the patient's clinical findings, with the clinician performing an organized evaluation of the size and forma- tion of various body structures. Familiarity with the terminology typi- cally used to describe anomalies is helpful (Table 100.4). The size and shape of the head is relevant; for example, many children with Down syndrome have mild microcephaly and a shortened anteroposterior dimension of skull, termed brachycephaly. Eye position, shape, and the slant of the palpebral fissures are useful signs for many disorders. Reference standards are available with which physical measurements (e.g., interpupillary distance) can be compared. It can be useful to cat- egorize anomalies as "major" or "minor" birth defects. Major defects either cause significant dysfunction or require surgical correction (see Table 100.5), and minor defects neither cause significant dysfunction nor require surgical correction (e.g., clinodactyly) (Table 100.6 and Fig. 100.8). By cataloging physical parameters, the clinician may be able to identify a characteristic pattern of anomalies and recognize the diag- nosis. Facial recognition software has been helpful in identifying the etiology of patients with facial dysmorphology (Fig. 100.9). Imaging Studies Imaging studies can be critical in diagnosing an underlying genetic eti- ology. If short stature or disproportionate stature (e.g., long trunk and short limbs) is noted, a full skeletal survey with radiographs should be performed. The skeletal survey can detect anomalies in bone number, structure, and formation that can be used to narrow the differential diagnosis. When there are abnormal neurologic signs or symptoms, such as hypotonia, and an abnormal head size, such as microcephaly, brain imaging can be indicated. Other studies and examinations, such as echocardiography, renal ultrasonography, and hearing and ophthal- mology evaluation, can also be useful to identify additional major or minor anomalies that may serve as diagnostic clues. 

Table 100.5 Major Malformations* NEUROLOGIC Severe hydrocephalus Lissencephaly Schizencephaly Megalencephaly Neural tube defect Meningomyelocele Encephalocele CARDIOVASCULAR Various congenital heart malformations Cardiomyopathy Genetic arrhythmia syndromes GENITOURINARY Ambiguous genitalia Kidney malformations Urachal defects RESPIRATORY Congenital pulmonary airway malformation Tracheoesophageal fistula ABDOMINAL WALL Gastroschisis Omphalocele CRANIOFACIAL Craniosynostosis Facial cleft Cleft lip and palate Structural eye defect Coloboma Aniridia Structural ear defects Microtia Aplasia of the auditory canal LIMB Amelia Split/hand foot malformation *Not an inclusive list. From Basel D. Dysmorphology in a genomic era. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:15-23. Table 1. Chapter 100 • Dysmorphology, Phenotyping, and Sequences 785 90 г 90% Mostly multiple major anomalies Table 100.6 Minor Malformations* CRANIOFACIAL Large fontanel Flat or low nasal bridge Saddle nose, upturned nose Micrognathia Cutis aplasia of the scalp EYE Palpebral fissures Telecanthus or epicanthus Up or down slanting Hypertelorism Brushfield spots EAR Posteriorly rotated pinna Lack of helical fold Preauricular with or without auricular skin tags Small pinna Auricular (preauricular) pit or sinus Folding of helix Darwinian tubercle Crushed (crinkled) ear Asymmetric ear sizes Low-set ears SKIN Dimpling over the bones Capillary hemangioma (face/ posterior neck) Dermal melanosis (African, Asian) Sacral dimple Pigmented nevi Redundant skin folds Cutis marmorata Café-au-lait macules HAND Simian crease Bridged upper palmar creases Fifth finger clinodactyly Joint hypermobility (hyperextension of thumb) Cutaneous syndactyly Polydactyly Short, broad thumb Narrow or hyperconvex nails Hypoplastic nails Camptodactyly Short fourth metacarpal FOOT Syndactyly of second/third toe Asymmetric toe length Clinodactyly of second toe Overlapping toes Nail hypoplasia Wide gap between hallux and second toe Deep plantar crease between hallux and second toe OTHER Mild calcaneovalgus Hydrocele Shawl scrotum Hypospadias Hypoplasia of labia majora Supernumerary nipples Undescended testes Tongue tie *Not an inclusive list. From Basel D. Dysmorphology in a genomic era. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:15-23. Table 2. Diagnosis The examining physician should gather data on the patient's pedigree and perinatal and pediatric history and should have an appreciation for the natural history of the clinical findings. At this point, the physician mations 50 - one malfor 30- With 10 % of l babies / 1.4% 3% (85%) (13.4%) (0.8%) 3 or more (0.5%) Number of minor malformations per newborn Fig. 100.8 Frequency of major malformations in relation to the num- ber of minor anomalies detected in a given newborn baby. (From Jones KJ. Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 6th ed Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006.) has examined the child, identified atypical physical features, and obtained appropriate imaging studies. The clinician should now attempt to organize the findings to elucidate potential developmental processes. An assessment based on specificity can be helpful for this process. If a child has multiple findings, such as a pat- ent ductus arteriosus (PDA), mild growth restriction, mild microcephaly, and holoprosencephaly, micropenis, and ptosis, a selection of the rarer or pathognomonic findings may be prioritized. The PDA, ptosis, mild growth restriction, and mild microcephaly are considered nonspecific findings, as they are present in many disorders or often present as isolated features that are not part of a syndrome. However, holoprosencephaly and micropenis are present in fewer syndromes and are not considered part of normal variation. The clinician can therefore search for disorders that include both holoprosencephaly and micropenis. The search can be performed manu- ally using the features index of a textbook such as Smith's Recognizable Pat- terns of Human Malformation or a computerized database such as Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM). Searching for both holoprosen- cephaly and micropenis returns a list of diagnostic possibilities, and the physician can then return to the patient to examine for additional features of the leading possible candidate disorders. Appropriate genetic testing can then be undertaken to confirm the clinician's hypothesis and verify the diagnosis. Alternatively, broad genetic testing can be undertaken if the patient's clinical findings are nonspecific. Laboratory Studies and Genetic Testing The laboratory evaluation of a child with anomalies can be critical to reach or confirm the correct diagnosis, particularly for metabolic condi- tions. Array CGH and SNP arrays enable the detection of chromosome abnormalities and copy number variants and, in the case of SNP arrays, evaluation for loss of heterozygosity. Chromosome deletion syndromes may also be identified with specific and sensitive FISH analysis, although this technology has been largely replaced by chromosome arrays and NGS sequencing. Cytogenetic studies with Giemsa-banded (G-banded) chromosome analysis are still useful for the diagnosis of Down syn- drome and balanced translocations (Table 100.7). These tests are sensi- tive methods for the detection of cytogenetic alterations associated with birth defects and MCAs. Cytogenetic alterations can also be detected by whole genome sequencing that is becoming increasingly utilized. Molecular testing for deleterious sequence variants that cause pleio- tropic malformation syndromes is also available for many disorders as clinical testing. In most cases, however, such testing should not be performed indiscriminately; instead, it should be ordered thoughtfully after a differential diagnosis has been considered. NGS with ES and whole genome sequencing has led to the identification of innumerable novel genes and revolutionized the testing that is available for patients and families with intellectual disability, birth dejects, and other genetic diseases. A strong suspicion of a genetic diagnosis warrants consider- ation of testing to confirm the diagnosis, facilitate patient treatment and anticipatory guidance, clarify recurrence risks, and enable carrier testing for additional family members. Single genes can still be tested by Sanger sequencing that targets single or multiple exons. However, 

786 Part VIII • Human Genetics Healthy groups Down syndrome HCLM training HCLM search Face Detector CLM model building 1st level model CLM search for full landmark set CLM ICA-based shape model Local texture model 2nd level normal model 2nd level DS model CLM refinement for landmark subset Model selection ROC Geometric Input space Feature space Landmark detection Texture Feature extraction Feature selection Classification Table 100.7 Chromosomal Deletion Syndromes CONDITION Williams syndrome WAGR syndrome Prader-Willi syndrome Angelman syndrome BRIEF DESCRIPTION Proportionate short stature, mild-moderate to severe intellectual disability, friendly personality, stellate pattern of iris pigmentation, supravalvular aortic stenosis, wide mouth with full lips Wilms tumor, aniridia, growth delay, intellectual disability, and genitourinary anomalies Distinct syndromes with common or overlapping areas of deletion; phenotype depends on gender of the parent of origin of the deletion Prader-Willi syndrome: hypotonia in infancy, short stature, obesity, mild-moderate and occasionally severe intellectual disability, small hands and feet (caused by paternal deletion of 15q11-13 or maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 15) Angelman syndrome: severe intellectual disability, absence of speech, ataxia, tremulous movements, large mouth, frequent drooling (caused by maternal deletion of chromosome 15q11-13 or paternal uniparental disomy) Brachycephaly, prognathism, self-destructive behavior, wrist biting, pulling out nails, head banging, indifference to pain, intellectual disability, hyperactivity Fig. 100.9 The Framework of Fa- cial Recognition for Genetic Syn- drome Detection. ICA, Independ- ent component analysis; CLM, constrained local model: HCLM. hierarchical CLM; DS, Down syn- characterstics. (From vero o, Oatinda <, Rosenbaum K, et al. Digital facial dysmorphology for genetic screen- ing: hierarchical constrained local model using ICA. Med Image Anal. 2014;18:699-710. Fig. 2.) PROBE 7q11 11p13 15q11 Smith-Magenis syndrome 17p11.2 Miller-Dieker syndrome 17p13 22q11 deletion syndrome Cleft palate, congenital heart disease, learning/behavior problems, long face, prominent nose, limb hypotonia, slender hands with tapering fingers, T-cell deficiency, immunoglobulin deficiency WAGR, Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation. From Kliegman RM, Lye PS, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-Based Diagnosis, Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 25-10. 22q11 for diagnoses that have substantial genetic heterogeneity (e.g., hearing loss), panel testing often using NGS, in which multiple relevant genes can be interrogated for single nucleotide variants and gene deletions and duplications, is more expeditious than single-gene testing. Panel tests also frequently have the advantage of providing high coverage for the genes on the panel compared with the coverage for the same genes that can be obtained by ES. However, in situations with diag- nostic uncertainty, such as the investigation of a child with intellectual disability and facial anomalies for which there is no clearly recogniz- able pattern, exome or genome sequencing (GS) may be most use- ful as a broad testing approach. ES examines approximately 200,000 exons, or the 1-2% of the DNA that comprises the coding regions of the genome. ES is typically performed with a trio approach, in which the patient and both biological parents are tested simultaneously, so that the inheritance pattern, or segregation, of deleterious sequence variants can be determined, thus simplifying analysis. Trio sequencing has resulted in higher diagnostic yields than proband-only sequenc- ing and can approach 30-40% for indications such as intellectual dis- ability. In contrast, GS examines the entire DNA content, including noncoding regions, and increasingly enables analysis for cytogenetic rearrangements in addition to copy number loss or gain. ES and GS are applicable to a wide range of birth defects and genetic diseases and can discover causative variants in known or novel genes associated with a particular condition. Management and Counseling Management and genetic counseling are essential aspects of the approach to a patient with a genetic disorder. For example, children with Down syndrome have a high incidence of hypothyroidism, and chil- dren with achondroplasia have a high incidence of cervicomedullary 

junction abnormalities and monitoring for both is appropriate. One of the many benefits of an early and accurate diagnosis is that antici- patory guidance and medical monitoring of patients for syndrome- specitic medical risks can improve their quality of life and prolong it. When a diagnosis is made, the treating physicians can access published information on the natural history and management of the disorder through the medical literature, genetics reference texts, and databases. Providing access to disorder-specific patient support groups can also provide immense benefit to patients and families. The second major benefit of an accurate diagnosis is that it provides data for recurrence risk estimates. Genetic disorders may have direct effects on only one member of the family, but the diagnosis of the con- dition can have implications for the entire family. One or both parents may be carriers, and siblings may be carriers or may want to know their genetic status when they reach their reproductive years. Recurrence risk provision is an important component of genetic counseling and should be included in all evaluations for families affected with birth defects or other inherited disorders (see Chapter 98). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 101 Signaling Pathway Disorders Chad R. Haldeman-Englert and Anne M. Slavotinek An increasing number of defined molecular genetic etiologies explain many multiple congenital anomaly (MCA) syndromes. Several themes have emerged: (1) many clinical disorders that were believed to repre- sent a single entity have multiple genetic etiologies, often within genes that are functionally related; (2) many disorders believed to be distinct have common underlying genetic bases; and (3) teratogens and genetic disorders with similar clinical features can often be understood in the context of shared underlying pathology. It is useful to consider MCA syndromes as members of a group of disor- ders based on shared or overlapping clinical findings and related causative genes that act in the same developmental or metabolic pathway. 101.1 RAS/MAPK Pathway Chad R. Haldeman-Englert and Anne M. Slavotinek The RASopathies comprise a clinically defined group of conditions caused by germline pathogenic variants in genes encoding the components or regulators of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS)/mitogen-activated pro- tein kinase (MAPK) pathway. This pathway is one of the most important signaling pathways in human development (Fig. 101.1). Signaling is ini- tiated when one of several growth factors or cytokines binds extracellu- larly to a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), which transmits the signal to activate of one of several intracellular RAS proteins, such as HRAS, KRAS, or NRAS. Phosphorylation then occurs in a stepwise manner to one or more RAF proteins (ARAF, BRAF, and/or CRAF), and subsequently to MEK1 and/or MEK2, and then ERK1 and/or ERK2. Acti- vation of ERK1/2 has downstream targets including transcription factors, Chapter 101 • Signaling Pathway Disorders 787 Growth factor RTK SHC SHP2 SOS1 GRB2 NF-1 CM-AVM Cell membrane RAS -GTP Neurofibromin p120GAP CBL NS NSML KRAS HRAS -GTP -GTP NRAS -GTP SHOC2 PP1C| (SPRED1) CRAF BRAF MEK1/ (MEK2 ERK1 ERK2 CS Legius syndrome CFC Numerous cytosolic Numerous effectors nuclear effectors Fig. 101.1 The RAS/MAPK signal transduction pathway. The MAPK signaling pathway of protein kinases is critically involved in cellular proliteration, differentiation, motility, apoptosis, and senescence. The RASopathies are patterns of anomalies caused by pathogenic variants in genes that encode components or regulators of the RAS/MAPK pathway (indicated by dashed lines). These disorders include neurofi- bromatosis type one (NF1), Noonan syndrome (NS), Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines (NSML), capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome (CM-AVM), Costello syndrome (CS), cardiofaci- ocutaneous syndrome (CFC), and Legius syndrome. RAS/MAPK, RAS protein family/mitogen-activated protein kinase. (From Rauen KA. The RASopathies. Annu Rev Genom Hum Genet. 2013;14:355-369.) membrane proteins, and other protein kinases that direct cellular growth and differentiation. More than 20 genes implicated in RAS/MAPK signaling have been implicated in human disorders, most with some degree of clinical over- lap. Common RASopathies include Noonan syndrome (NS), NS with multiple lentigines, Costello syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome, neurofibromatosis type one (NF1), Legius syndrome, and capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation syndrome (Table 101.1). NS represents the canonical RASopathy and is an autosomal dom- inant disorder resulting from pathogenic variants in several genes in the RAS/MAPK pathway. NS occurs in an estimated 1 in 1,000- 2,500 live births. Approximately 30-75% of the cases are familial, and the condition typically exhibits autosomal dominant inheri- tance, although the LZTRi gene can be associated with autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive inheritance. Pathogenic variants in RAS/MAPK genes are found in ~70% of individuals with NS, with missense variants activating the PTPN11 gene that encodes the nonreceptor protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2; this is observed in 50% of affected individuals. Pathogenic variants involving SOS1 occur in 10-13% of affected individuals; variants in RAF1 and RIT1 each occur in 5% of patients, and variants in KRAS, BRAF, MAP2K1, LZTRI, and NRAS and duplications of the 12q24 region containing the PTPN11 gene are rare. The strong clinical overlap between NS and other RASopathies, such as CFC syndrome, is due to the involvement of the same pathway and often identical genes in pathogenesis. Common features in NS comprise short stature, a characteris- tic pattern of facial anomalies including ptosis, wide-spaced eyes with down-slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, anomalous and low-set ears and micrognathia, congenital heart disease, chest deformities with pectus excavatum and/or pectus carinatum, a short or wide neck with a low posterior hairline, and cryptorchidism 

788 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 101.1 SYNDROME Noonan syndrome Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines Genes and Features of the RAS/MAPK Pathway RAS/MAPK PATHWAY GENE PROTEIN PTPN11 SOS1 SHP2 SOS1 RAF1 CRAF KRAS NRAS KRAS SHOC2 NRAS SHOC2 CBL RIT1 CBL RIT1 PTPN11 SHP2 RAF1 RAF1/CRAF Capillary malformation- arteriovenous malformation Costello syndrome RASA1 p120-RasGAP HRAS HRAS Cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome BRAF МАР2К1 MAP2K2 KRAS BRAF MEK1 MEK2 KRAS Neurofibromatosis type 1 NF1 Neurofibromin Legius syndrome SPRED1 SPRED1 PROTEIN FUNCTION CLINICAL PHENOTYPE Phosphatase Craniofacial dysmorphic features, including a RasGEF broad forehead, hypertelorism, down-slanting Kinase palpebral fissures, ptosis, a high-arched palate, GTPase and low-set, posteriorly rotated ears; congenital GTPase heart defects; short stature; undescended Scaffolding testicles; ophthalmologic abnormalities; bleeding E3 ubiquitin ligase GTPase disorders; normal neurocognitive function or mild impairment; predisposition to cancer Phosphatase Same as Noonan syndrome, but with possible Kinase development of multiple skin lentigines as individuals age; unclear predisposition to cancer RasGAP Multifocal capillary malformations, which may be associated with arteriovenous malformations and fistulae; unclear predisposition to cancer GTPase Craniofacial features similar to those of Noonan syndrome but potentially more coarse; congenital heart defects; failure to thrive; short stature; ophthalmologic abnormalities; multiple skin manifestations, including papilloma; normal neurocognitive function or mild impairment; hypotonia; predisposition to cancer Kinase Kinase Kinase GTPase Craniofacial features similar to those of Noonan syndrome; congenital heart defects; failure to thrive; short stature; ophthalmologic abnormalities; multiple skin manifestations, including progressive formation of nevi; normal neurocognitive function or mild impairment; hypotonia; unclear predisposition to cancer RasGAP Café-au-lait maculae; intertriginous freckling; neurofibromas and plexiform neurofibromas; iris Lisch nodules; osseous dysplasia; optic pathway glioma; normal neurocognitive function or mild impairment; predisposition to other cancers SPROUTY-related EVH1 domain-containing protein 1 Caté-au-lait maculae; intertriginous freckling; macrocephaly; normal neurocognitive function or mild impairment; no apparent predisposition to cancer Modified from Rauen KA. The RASopathies. Annu Rev Genom Hum Genet. 2013;14:355-369. Table 3. (Table 101.2 and Fig. 101.2). The pattern of congenital heart disease typically involves right-sided lesions, most frequently presenting with pulmonary valvular stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopa- thy, but atrial and ventricular septal defects, branch pulmonary artery stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot, and coarctation of the aorta have all been described. Children with NS can manifest developmental delays in association with hypotonia and may have challenges with articulation and coordination. High-frequency sensorineural hear- ing loss is common and should be considered in patients with lan- guage delays. Hepatosplenomegaly, low levels of clotting factors XI and XII, and primary lymphatic anomalies have also been noted; patients may rarely develop acute lymphoblastic leukemia or juve- nile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Puberty may be delayed, and an adult height that reaches the lower limit of the typical range can be achieved by the end of the second decade. Other distinctive phenotypes include NS-like disorder with loose anagen hair caused by SHOC2 variants and NS-like disorder with or without JMML caused by CBL variants. DIAGNOSIS Initial suspicion of a RASopathy generally depends on recognition of one or more characteristic features associated with the various condi- tions. Genetic testing includes a panel of genes including those in the RAS/MAPK pathway. Multigene panel testing is preferred over single- gene analysis due to the many overlapping symptoms seen in RASopa- thy disorders. Genetic testing can often be performed on blood, saliva, or a buccal swab. If a gene in the RAS/MAPK pathway is found to have a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant, this would provide molecu- lar confirmation of the clinical diagnosis. TREATMENT Management of NS is noted in Table 101.3. Human growth hormone will improve growth velocity in many individuals with NS and short stature; it is recommended for those who fall below the third percen- tile for height. MEK inhibitors, such as trametinib, have been used to treat refractory lymphedema or chylous effusions and possibly severe cardiac hypertrophy. 

Table 101.2 Clinical Findings Associated with Noonan Syndrome Short stature Failure to thrive (use of specific Noonan syndrome growth curves is recommended) Tall forehead Epicanthal folds Ptosis Blue-green irides Wide-spaced eyes Low nasal bridge, upturned nose Down-slanting palpebral fissures Low-set and posteriorly rotated ears Dental malocclusion Low posterior hairline Pectus excavatum Pectus carinatum superiorly Scoliosis Pigmented villonodular synovitis (polyarticular) Cubitus valgus Pulmonary valve stenosis (dysplastic valve) Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect Lymphedema Nevi, lentigines, café-au-lait spots Cryptorchidism Small penis Delayed puberty Bleeding disorders, including thrombocytopenia and coagulation factor deficiencies Leukemia, myeloproliferative disorders, other malignancies Cognitive delay NEUROFIBROMATOSIS NF1 is a multisystem disorder that primarily abstractly involves the skin and peripheral nervous system (see Chapter 636.1). NF1 is associ- ated with marked clinical variability. NF1 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The disorder is caused by pathogenic variants in the NFl gene, which encodes neurofibromin and functions as a regulator of RAS signaling (see Table 101.1 and Fig. 101.1). LEGIUS SYNDROME Legius syndrome is a RASopathy caused by pathogenic variants in SPRED1, which encodes an HRAS regulator. Individuals with Legius syndrome present with typical multiple café-au-lait macules inherited as an autosomal dominant trait but do not develop the serious medical complications of NF1. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 101.2 Sonic Hedgehog Pathway Chad R. Haldeman-Englert The Hedgehog signaling pathway plays numerous tissue-specific criti- cal roles during embryogenesis and postnatal life. Disruption of spe- cific steps in this pathway result in a variety of related developmental disorders and anomalies (Fig. 101.3). Activation of this pathway in the child or adult may lead to abnormal cellular proliferation and cancer. Three genes, Sonic (SHH), Indian (IHH), and Desert (DHH), comprise the hedgehog family, with SHH being the most widely expressed. These Chapter 101 • Signaling Pathway Disorders 789 Fig. 101.2 Noonan syndrome. A, Newborn. B, Toddler. C, Affected male. Note the down-slanting palpebral fissures, low-set ears, elevated left shoulder secondary to scoliosis, and wide-spaced nipples. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 1AC, p. 150 and Fig. 2A, p. 151; A and B courtesy Dr. Jacqueline Noonan, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky.) genes encode secreted signaling molecules important in cellular differ- entiation, proliferation, and survival. Secreted SHH acts as a ligand for specific cellular receptors to have a signal transduced by other compo- nents of the pathway to regulate downstream gene transcription. The SHH ligand is expressed in the embryo in regions important for devel- opment of the brain, face, limbs, and the gut. Deleterious sequence variants in SHH can cause holoprosenceph- aly (see Fig. 100.7), a variably severe, midline defect associated with clinical effects ranging from cyclopia to a single maxillary incisor with close spacing of the ocular orbits. The SHH protein is processed by pro- teolytic cleavage to an active N-terminal form, which is then further modified by the addition of cholesterol. The steroidal alkaloid cyclo- pamine exerts a teratogenic effect by inhibiting cholesterol modifica- tion of SHH and can result in holoprosencephaly in sheep. In humans, a defect in cholesterol biosynthesis involving the recessive delta-7- dehydrocholesterol reductase gene (DHCR7) results in Smith-Lemli- Opitz syndrome (SLOS) (see Chapter 106). In addition to microcephaly and holoprosencephaly, patients with SLOS (see Fig. 101.3) display syndactyly, classically of the second and third toes, postaxial polydactyly of the hands and feet, an upturned or anteverted nose, ptosis, and cryptorchidism. The cholesterol-modified active form of SHH binds to its transmem- brane receptor Patched (PTCH1). This SHH-PTCH1 complex then inhibits the activity of the transmembrane protein Smoothened (SMO). Because SMO normally acts to suppress downstream targets, the GLI family of transcription factors, inhibition of SMO by PTCH1 results in activation of GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3. Pathogenic variants resulting in activation of SMO can be oncogenic, particularly in basal cell carci- nomas and medulloblastomas. In addition, PTCH1 and its orthologue, PTCH2, act as tumor suppressors, and somatic, inactivating sequence variants can be associated with loss of tumor suppressor function. Relatedly, germline inactivating variants in PTCH1 result in Gorlin syndrome (see Fig. 101.3), an autosomal dominant disorder charac- terized by a broad face, dental anomalies, rib defects and shortened 

790 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 101.3 Management of Noonan Syndrome General AT DIAGNOSIS Complete physical and neurologic examination; medical genetics consultation to confirm diagnosis, consider molecular genetic testing and genetic counseling Developmental Multidisciplinary developmental assessment AFTER DIAGNOSIS Yearly complete physical and neurologic examination; return to emilisti emoses menti venetic counseling at adolescence or when a young adult Developmental screening yearly for children age 5-18 years Dental First dental assessment between age 1 Yearly dental assessment year and 2 years Growth and feeding Plot growth on curves for Noonan syndrome Plot growth on curves for Noonan syndrome 3 times per year until age 3 years, then yearly IF SYMPTOMATIC refer to specialty clinic; brain and cervical spine MRI if intracranial pressure increases; electroencephalogram and referral to neurologist if seizures suspected Neuropsychologist testing if screening abnormal; referral to early intervention indilas detected o plan for chieren; age 5-18 years with delays Refer to gastroenterologist for feeding problence ore romen talue inithout comorbid cause exists; thyroid function tests if signs or symptoms of hypothyroidism Cardiovascular Cardiac examination, electrocardiogram, echocardiogram Ophthalmologic Audiologic Baseline eye examination Baseline audiology examination Baseline audiology examination Follow up on the basis of initial findings. If initial assessment normal, repeat every 5 years Repeat every 2 years, sooner if indicated Repeat if recurrent otitis media or speech delay Hematologic Complete blood cell count with differential, and prothrombin time or activated partial thromboplastin time Refer to ear, nose, and throat specialist for recurrent otitis media or serous otitis; hearing aids or classroom interventions for hearing loss Repeat complete blood cell count with Prothrombin time or activated partial differential and prothrombin time or thromboplastin time if bleeding activated partial thromboplastin time abnormal or persistent, refer to if age 6-12 months at initial screen hematologist; complete blood Preoperatively: complete blood cell count with differential for cell count with differential and splenomegaly; complete blood prothrombin time or activated partial cell count with differential thromboplastin time, second tier and liver function studies for (in consultation with hematologist) hepatosplenomegaly factor IX, XI, and XII concentrations, von Willebrand factor, platelet aggregation Renal Skeletal Kidney ultrasound Clinical assessment of spine with radiology if indicated by examination Repeat spinal examination yearly through adolescence; radiology and referral to orthopaedic specialist if abnormal From Roberts AE, Allanson JE, Tartaglia M, Gelb BD. Noonan syndrome. Lancet. 2013;381:333-342. metacarpals; basal cell nevi that can undergo malignant transforma- tion; and an increased risk of cancers, including medulloblastomas and rhabdomyosarcomas. GLI1 amplification has been found in sev- eral human tumors, including glioblastoma, osteosarcoma, rhabdo- myosarcoma, and B-cell lymphomas. Likewise, pathogenic variants in GLI3 can cause Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS), Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), postaxial polydactyly type A (and A/B), and preaxial polydactyly type IV (see Fig. 101.3). GCPS consists of wide-spaced eyes, syndactyly, additional digits on the radial border of the hand or inner aspect of the foot, termed preaxial polydactyly, and broad thumbs and halluces. PHS is an autosomal dominant disor- der characterized by postaxial polydactyly, syndactyly, hypothalamic hamartomas, imperforate anus, and occasionally holoprosencephaly. GLI3 binds to CBP, the protein that is haploinsufficient in Rubinstein- Taybi syndrome. Disorders that are caused by pathogenic variants in genes that function together in a developmental pathway typically have overlap- ping clinical manifestations. The overlapping teatures result from the embryonic tissues in which SHH is important for development, includ- ing the brain, face, limbs, and gut as previously noted. Brain defects are present in holoprosencephaly (see Fig. 100.7), SLOS, and PHS. Facial anomalies are found in holoprosencephaly, SLOS, Gorlin syndrome, GCPS, and PHS. Limb defects occur in SLOS, Gorlin syndrome, GCPS, PHS, and the polydactyly syndromes. Overexpression, or acti- vating sequence variants, affecting the SHH pathway results in cancer, 

Chapter 101 • Signaling Pathway Disorders 791 • Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome • Microcephaly • Short, qualied nose • Postsapolydactyly • Sonic Hedgehog Cleavage N-SHH • Cholesterol N-SHH•Chol • Patched 1 • Holoprosencephaly • Microcephaly • railre or disability lateralization • Hypotelorism Smoothened ~ GLI-1 --GLI3 • CBP • Gorlin Syndrome • Macrocephaly • Wide-set eyes • Basal cell carcinoma • Rib anomalies Twist → GLI1 PTC1 HNF3B O Pallister-Hall Syndrome • Hypothalamic hamartoma • Short, upturned nose • Central and postaxial polydactyly • Bifid epiglottis • Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome • Microcephaly • Intellectual disability • Prominent beaked nose • Broad thumbs • Hirsutism • Holoprosencephaly • Smith-Lemli-Opitz • Gorlin Syndrome • Greig Syndrome • Pallister-Hall Syndrome • Rubinstein-Taybi including basal cell carcinomas, medulloblastomas, glioblastomas, and rhabdomyosarcomas. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 101.3 Ciliopathies Chad R. Haldeman-Englert Cilia are microtubule-containing organelles that project from the sur- face of most human cells. Three types of cilia exist in humans: motile cilia, nodal cilia, and primary cilia. Motile cilia typically contain a sweeping motion and play important roles in the respiratory epithe- lium (see Chapter 455 for discussion of structure of cilia and their role in primary ciliary dyskinesia and respiratory disorders). Nodal cilia play a very brief role during embryonic development, and their whirling flow in the Henson's node during gastrulation is central in determining the left-right body axis. Defects in this process manifest as alterations in body orientation, including situs inversus and heterotaxy (see Chapter 480.11). Primary cilia are nonmotile and are present in nearly all cells. The membrane of each cilium is continuous with the plasma mem- brane. There are unique differences in its membrane that allow cilia to detect changes in the extracellular environment to func- tion as mechanoreceptors, osmosensors, and chemosensors and • Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Syndrome • Macrocephaly • Hypertelorism • Pre- and postaxial polydactyly Fig. 101.3 Signaling components and clinical features of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signal- ing pathway. Deleterious sequence variants in genes that function together in a develop- mental pathway typically have overlapping clinical manifestations. Several components of the SHH pathway have been identified and their relationships elucidated. Pathogenic vari- ants in several members of this pathway result in phenotypes with facial anomalies, as seen in holoprosencephaly, Smith-Lemli-Opitz syn- drome, Gorlin syndrome, Greig cephalopoly- syndactyly syndrome, Pallister-Hall syndrome, and Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. CNS, Central nervous system. convey this information via various intracellular signaling path- ways to regulate diverse cellular processes (proliferation, polar- ity, nerve growth, differentiation, and tissue maintenance). These pathways may include Hedgehog (HH), G-protein-coupled recep- tors (GPCRs), Wingless and Int-1 (WNT), RTKs, and transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß). Pathogenic changes to genes that control the function and signaling within the cilia give rise to conditions called ciliopathies. Given the extent of cilia located throughout the human body, symptoms associated with ciliopathies can be variable and extensive. Defects can occur to many different organs during fetal development through adulthood. Organ systems generally affected in ciliopathies include the brain, eyes, liver, kid- neys, and skeleton (Fig. 101.4). There are many well-described ciliopathy effects, including retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss, infertility, primary ciliary dyskinesia, polycystic kidney disease, and nephronophthisis, as well as a number of syndromes including Joubert, Bardet-Biedl, Meckel- Gruber, and orofaciodigital syndromes (Table 101.4). The diagnosis of a ciliopathy is generally based on recognition of the clinical features followed by either targeted gene testing, a multi- gene panel, or exome/genome sequencing. If a diagnosis is established with molecular testing, additional studies may be indicated to evaluate for additional medical and developmental concerns. Surveillance for potential changes to the kidneys, liver, and eyes should be routinely performed. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

792 Part VIII • Human Genetics Fig. 101.4 Ciliopathies of motile and/or nonmotile cilia encompass most human organ systems. Different organ systems or tissues are affected in diverse ciliopathies, with the most common phenotypic mani- festations for each organ. Ciliopathies caused primarily by defects in motile cilia are in orange, those in nonmotile (prima- ry) cilia are in blue, and those associated with defects in nodal cilia are in green. NPHP, Nephronophthisis; PKD, polycystic kidney disease. (Modified from Reiter JF, Leroux MR. Genes and molecular path- ways underpinning ciliopathies. Nat Rev Molec Cell. 2017;18:533-547. Fig. 2.) Eyes- Nose - Ears Organ placement Energy _ homeostasis Skeleton - Reproductive system Motile cilia Non-motile cilia Both types of cilia Retinal dystrophy Anosmia Hearing loss Organ laterality defects Central obesity Skeletal anomalies (polydactyly, rib cage) Infertility • Hypogonadism • Genital anomalies • Ataxia • Epilepsy • Mental disability • Brain malformations Hydrocephalus Facial anomalies Congenital heart defects Chronic respiratory problems Renal anomalies (PKD, NPHP) Hepatic disease (liver fibrosis) - Brain Heart Respiratory system Kidney - Liver Table 101.4 Childhood Diseases and Syndromes Associated with Motile and Primary/Sensory Ciliopathies PEDIATRIC CILIOPATHY CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS SELECTED GENE(S) MOTOR Primary ciliary dyskinesia Chronic bronchitis, rhinosinusitis, otitis media, laterality defects, infertility, CHD DNAI1, DNAHS, DNAH11, DNAI2, KTU, TXNDC3, LRRC50, RSPH9, RSPH4A, CCDC40, CCDC39 PRIMARY/SENSORY Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease RFD, CHF Nephronophthisis RFD, interstitial nephritis, CHF, RP Bardet-Biedl syndrome Obesity, polydactyly, ID, RP, renal anomalies, anosmia, CHD Meckel-Gruber syndrome RFD, polydactyly, ID, CNS anomalies, CHD, cleft lip, cleft palate Joubert syndrome CNS anomalies, ID, ataxia, RP, polydactyly, cleft lip, cleft palate Alström syndrome Obesity, RP, DM, hypothyroidism, hypogonadism, skeletal dysplasia, cardiomyopathy, pulmonary fibrosis PKHD1 NPHP1-8, ALMS1, CEP290 BBS1-12, MKS1, MKS3, CEP 290 MKS1-6, CC2D2A, CEP 290, TMEM216 NPHP1, JB151, JBT53, JB154, CORSZ, AHIT, CEP290, TMEM216 ALMS1 Orofaciodigital syndrome type I OFD1 Ellis van Creveld syndrome Choslai, trophy, polydacty, ectodermal EVC, EVC2 Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy Sensenbrenner syndrome Narrow thorax, RFD, RP, dwarfism, polydactyly IFT80 Dolichocephaly, ectodermal dysplasia, dental IFT122, IFT43, WDR35 dysplasia, narrow thorax, RFD, CHD Short rib-polydactyly syndromes Narrow thorax, short limb dwarfism, WDR35, DYNC2H1, NEK1 polydactyly, renal dysplasia CHD, Congenital heart disease; CHF, congenital hepatic fibrosis; CNS, central nervous system; DM, diabetes mellitus; ID, intellectual disabilities; RFD, renal fibrocystic disease; RP, retinitis pigmentosa. From Ferkol TW, Leigh MW. Ciliopathies: the central role of cilia in a spectrum of pediatric disorders. J Pediatr. 2012;160:366-371. 

101.4 Craniosynostoses Chad R. Haldeman-Englert To permit appropriate brain growth, the cranial sutures do not com- pletely fuse until adulthood. Growth of the skull occurs perpendicular to the direction of each suture. Craniosynostosis arises when one or more cranial sutures prematurely ossify, which usually becomes appar- ent between the third trimester of pregnancy and the first year of life (see Chapter 631.10). The shape of the skull is often the clue to the affected suture (Fig. 101.5). Most patients with craniosynostosis do not have additional syndromic features; this may depend on the sutures involved. Patients with bicoronal or multisuture craniosynostosis often have an associated genetic syndrome, whereas patients with isolated sagittal cra- niosynostosis do not have features of an identifiable genetic cause. Craniosynostosis can result from reduced intrinsic factors (poor brain growth), increased extrinsic forces (primiparity, multiple preg- nancy, fetal position, high birth weight), or genetic abnormalities lead- ing to uncontrolled cranial bone growth. Genes commonly associated with syndromic craniosynostosis include three fibroblast growth factor receptor genes (FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3), TWIST1, and EFNB1. FGFR1, Chapter 101 • Signaling Pathway Disorders 793 FGFR2, and FGFR3 are associated with recognizable conditions such as Crouzon, Pfeiffer, Apert, and Muenke syndromes; TWIST1 with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome; and EFNB1 with craniofrontonasal syn- drome. Distinguishing between the FGFR-related craniosynostosis syndromes can often be made based on additional features, particularly of the hands and feet (see Chapter 631.10). Other pathogenic gene variants have been identified in patients with syndromic and nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (Table 101.5). Given the overlap of clinical features of many of the craniosynostosis con- ditions, appropriate genetic testing for patients with craniosynostosis could include either a multigene panel or exome/genome sequencing. The diagnosis is made based on the genetic abnormality and clinical features. Management of patients with craniosynostosis is often complex and performed with a multidisciplinary team of various specialists, including audiology, dentistry, genetics, neurosurgery, ophthalmology, orthodontics, otolaryngology, pediatrics, plastic surgery, and speech therapy (see Chapter 631.10). Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks. Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Types of Craniosynostosis Front Frontal Bone Anterior Fontana le Left ranetal bone Posterior Fontanel le Metopic (Frontal) Suture Coronal Suture Right Back Lambdoid Suture Occipital Bone Metopic Synostotic Ingonocephaly Sagittal Synostotic Scaphocephaly Lambdoid Synostotic Posterior Plagiocephaly Bicoronal Unicoronal (All Sutures Open) Synostotic Brachycephaly Synostotic Anterior Plagiocephaly Deformational Posterior Plagiocephaly Fig. 101.5 Types of craniosynostosis. (From Buchanan EP, Xue Y, Xue AS, Olshinka A, Lam S. Multidisciplinary care of craniosynostosis. J Multidiscip Healthcare. 2017;10:263-270. Fig. 1. Dove Medical Press Ltd.) 

794 Part VIII • Human Genetics Table 101.5 Core Genes For Which Specific Types of Variants Are Associated with Craniosynostosis in More Than Half of Affected Individuals INHERITANCE CLINICAL DISORDER PREVALENCE TYPICAL SUTURE GENE (MIM#) ASXL1 (612990) PATTERN (MIM#) FUSION AD (n) Bohring-Opitz - Metopic syndrome (605039) CDC45(603465) AR COLEC11 (612502) AR 3MC syndrome 2 (265050) EFNB1 (300035) XLD (male sparing) Craniotrontonasal syndrome (304110) ERF (611888) FGFR1 (136350) FGFR1 FGFR2(176943) FGFR2 FGFR2 FGFR2 FGFR2 FGFR3(134934) AD AD AD (n) AD (n) AD (n) AD AD (n) AD (n) AD AD (n) AD (n) ERF-related craniosynostosis (600775) Pfeiffer syndrome (101600) Osteoglophonic dysplasia (166250) Apert syndrome (101200) Beare-Stevenson syndrome (123790) Crouzon syndrome (123500) Pfeiffer syndrome (101600) Bent bone dysplasia (614592) Muenke syndrome (602849) Cronica a Canth Thanatophoric dysplasia lI (187601) ІНН (600726) AD Philadelphia craniosynostosis (185900) - - 0.8 1.1 - 3.6 * 2.4 0.8 4.0 0.4 - Coronal Metopic Coronal Multisuture Coronal Multisuture Coronal, multisuture Multisuture Multisuture, coronal, sagittal Multisuture Coronal Coronal Multisuture Multisuture Sagittal MAJOR PHENOTYPIC FEATURES Forehead nevus flammeus, ulnar deviation and flexion of wrists seve metacarctua disal joints, Thin eyebrows, small ears, variable short stature Hypertelorism, blepharoptosis, arched eyebrows, cleft lip/palate, hearing los escional systosis, Hypeste lima, nes cong nadal tip, relities of naise hetero yeous than hemizygous males Exorbitism, midface hypoplasia, Chiari type I malformation, postnatal onset of craniosynostosis Mild craniofacial features, broad medially deviated thumbs and halluces, cutaneous syndactyly, specific amino acid substitution p. Pro252Arg Prominent brow ridges, depressed nasal bridge, rhizomelic dwarfism, localized lytic lesions of metaphyses Midface hypoplasia, dilated cerebral ventricles, complex syndactyly of the hands and feet Choanal atresia, prominent umbilical stump, furrowed scalp/neck skin, acanthosis nigricans in survivors Exorbitism, midface hypoplasia, beaked nose (" crouzonoid" facies), clinically normal hands and feet Broad thumbs and halluces; in severe cases, cloverleaf skull, brain anomalies, tracheal sleeve, fused elbows Ostene cal are end ming ralation perinatal lethal Defined by specific amino acid substitution p.Pro250Arg; may include sensorineural hearing loss, mild brachydactyly, cone-shaped epiphyses Crouzonoid facies, choanal stenosis, hydrocephalus, acanthosis substation pAla mino acid Lethal skeletal dysplasia, micromelic limb shortening, straight femora; specific amino acid substitution p.Lys650Glu Cutaneous and osseous syndactyly 

Chapter 101 • Signaling Pathway Disorders 795 Table 101.5 MAJOR PHENOTYPIC GENE (MIM#) IL11RA (600939) Core Genes For Which Specific Types of Variants Are Associated with Craniosynostosis in More Than Half of Affected Individuals-cont'd INHERITANCE CLINICAL DISORDER PREVALENCE TYPICAL SUTURE PATTERN (MIM#) (%) FUSION AR Craniosynostosis and Multisuture dental anomalies (614188) FEATURES Maxillary hypoplasia, delayed tooth eruption, supernumerary teeth, minor digit abnormalities, conductive hearing loss MEGF8 (604267) AR Carpenter syndrome 2 (614796) - Metopic Hyperalation, arched eye rydactyly. syndactyly, preaxial polydactyly MSX2(123101) AD Boston craniosynostosis (604757) Sagittal, coronal, multisuture None diagnostic; syndrome defined by specific amino acid substitutions p. Pro 148His, p.Pro 148Leu POR (124015) AR Antley-Bixler syndrome (201750) Bicoronal, multisuture Choanal stenosis, radiohumeral synostosis, bowed femora, multiple joint contractures, genital abnormalities; abnormal steroidogenesis RAB23(606144) AR Carpenter syndrome 1 (201000) - Multisuture Obesity, cardiac defects, polysyndactyly, brachydactyly, genu valgum, hypogenitalism, umbilical hernia, learning disability RUNX2(600211) AD (n) - Multisuture None diagnostic; syndrome defined by specific gene duplication SKI (164780) AD (n) Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (182212) - Sagittal, multisuture Hypertelorism, micrognathia, high-arched palate, arachnodactyly, joint contractures, pectus deformity, aortic root aneurysm, mitral valve prolapse, learning disability TCF12(600480) AD TCF12-related craniosynostosis (615314) 1.3 Coronal Resembles mild Saethre-Chotzen By drome; dia mosis des in the gene, ~50% nonpenetrance TWIST1 (601622) AD Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (101400) 3.6 Coronal Low fro pal as, line, yantelorism, palpebral fissures, blocked tear ducts, ical ears with prominent WDR35(613602) AR Cranioectodermal dysplasia 2 (613610) - Sagittal Facial dysmorphism, narrow thorax, short long bones, brachydactyly, sparse hair, hypoplastic teeth, cystic kidneys, hepatic fibrosis ZIC1 (600470) AD (n) ZIC1-related craniosynostosis 0.2 Coronal Severe learning disability The prevalence figures are for percent total craniosynostosis cases with specified mutation, from the cohort attending the Craniofacial Unit, Oxford, born between 1998 and 2008 (n = 531) and surgically treated before end of 2013. *Usually lethal at birth. A Logg a Wilkie M. A tostit raceshy i logical frame work to cran) synal aise my Hum tanetics: 2015,97:359-377. Table 1. 

796 Part VIII • Human Genetics Chapter 102 Chromatin Regulatory Disorders Kosuke Izumi Pathogenic variants in genes that encode chromatin proteins that orchestrate gene expression in a range of human tissues frequently cause pediatric developmental disorders that include developmental delay/intellectual disability and facial dysmorphisms. KABUKI SYNDROME Kabuki syndrome (MIM: 147920 and 300867) is a genetic disorder characterized by facial features, mild to moderate intellectual disability, growth deficiency, and skeletal anomalies. Kabuki syndrome was origi- nally named "Kabuki make-up syndrome" due to patients' facial fea- tures, suggestive of those of Kabuki actors (Fig. 102.1). Approximately 1:32,000 to 1:86,000 individuals are estimated to have Kabuki syndrome. Molecular Etiology Heterozygous KMT2D pathogenic variants (~90%), and hemizygous (in males) or heterozygous (in females) KDM6A pathogenic variants (~10%) cause classic Kabuki syndrome; KMT2D encodes a histone methyltransferase and KDM6A encodes a histone demethylase. Both of these histone modification enzymes regulate histone codes to orches- trate global gene expression. Most genetic changes causing Kabuki syn- drome are due to de novo changes. However, because KDM6A locates on the X chromosome, its inheritance pattern can be complex, with most KDM6A pathogenic variants being de novo, but maternal trans- mission of pathogenic KDM6A variants has been seen. Kabuki-like syndromes share many clinical features but do not have pathogenic variants in KMT2D or KDM6A. Clinical Features of Kabuki Syndrome (Table 102.1) Physical features: Common features of Kabuki syndrome include long palpebral fissures with eversion of the lateral third of the lower eye- lid, arched broad eyebrows, a short columella, depressed nasal tip, large, prominent or cupped ears, and persistent fingertip pads (see Fig. 102.1). Dental anomalies such as widely spaced teeth and hypo- dontia are commonly seen. Growth and feeding: Individuals with Kabuki syndrome often have short stature and feeding difficulties. The degree of difficulty with Fig. 102.1 Physical features syndrome. A, Patient with KMT2D c.10201C>T, p.GIn3401* pathogenic variant. Dysmorphic fea- tures include long and up-slanted palpebral fissures and large prominent ears. B, Patient with KDM6A c.3717G>A; p. Trp 1239* pathogenic variant. Dysmorphic features include long and up-slanted palpebral fissures. feeding and growth varies, but it is not uncommon for infants or children with Kabuki syndrome to require feeding tubes. Development and behavior: Global developmental delay is common- ly seen in children with Kabuki syndrome, and individuals with Ka- buki syndrome typically have mild to moderate intellectual disabil- ity. Most individuals speak and ambulate independently. Although infrequent, autism is seen in Kabuki syndrome. Neurology: Hypotonia is a common feature. Structural brain differ- ences are typically not seen, but individuals with Kabuki syndrome have an ~30% risk for seizures. Congenital heart disease: Approximately 70% of children with Ka- buki syndrome have a structural heart defect. The most common types include coarctation of the aorta and septal defects, although complex congenital heart disease is also seen. Gastrointestinal: In addition to feeding difficulties, structural anoma- lies such as anal atresia, congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), and cholestasis can be seen. Endocrinology: Hypoglycemia or hyperinsulinemia can be seen, and some females with Kabuki syndrome have early premature thelarche. Ophthalmology: The common everted lower eyelid seen in Kabuki can lead to excessive tearing. Other eye differences can include pto- sis, cataracts, corneal differences, blue sclerae, or strabismus. Ear, nose, and throat: Hearing loss, mainly conductive hearing loss, and more rarely sensorineural hearing loss, is seen in up to 50% of individuals with Kabuki syndrome. Chronic otitis media is a major cause of conductive hearing loss. Individuals with Kabuki syndrome can also have cleft lip and/or palate. Genitourinary: Kidney and urinary tract disorders occur in more than 25% and can include abnormal renal location, duplicated collecting system, hypospadias and cryptorchidism in males, and hypoplastic labia in females. Musculoskeletal: Many individuals have joint hypermobility that can manifest with scoliosis. Spinal abnormalities such as sagittal clefts and hemivertebrae can be seen in individuals with Kabuki syn- drome. Immunology and hematology: Frequent and recurrent infections in- cluding sinopulmonary infections and otitis media are common in children with Kabuki syndrome. Some can have hypogammaglobu- linemia and immune dysfunction, with some needing regular intra- venous immunoglobulin injection. Autoimmune disorders such as vitiligo, immune thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, and coagu- lopathy are also common. Molecular diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome: This is often made using se- quencing and deletion/duplication analyses of KMT2D and KDM6A following clinical suspicion or by exome sequencing. Often, parental testing is performed to determine whether the identified variant is de novo. In addition, a DNA methylation profile has been identi- fied for Kabuki syndrome caused by KMT2D and KDM6A variants, and a matching profile can support the diagnosis in the context of uncertain pathogenicity of identified KMT2D or KDM6A variants. RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS; MIM 180849 and 613684) is char- acterized by down-slanted palpebral fissures, broad thumb and first toe, developmental delay/intellectual disability, and short stature (Fig. 102.2). It occurs in ~ 1 in 125,000 births. Molecular Etiology RSTS is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in CREBBP and EP300 genes. These genes encode transcriptional co-activators as his- tone lysine acetyltransferases. RSTS is caused by pathogenic variants, typically de novo in CREBBP in 55% and in EP300 in ~8%. CREBBP pathogenic variants tend to result in more typical RSTS features, with EP300 alterations resulting in a wider, often milder, phenotypic spectrum. 

Chapter 102 • Chromatin Regulatory Disorders 797 Table 102.1 CLINICAL FEATURES Facial features Kabuki Phenotype Scoring List POSSIBLE SCORE 0-5 points (0-3 features = 1 point; 4-6 = 2 point; 7-9 = 3 point; 10-12 = 4 point; 13-15 = 5 point) FEATURES abnormal dentition; high/cleft palate; strabismus; blue sclera; micrognathia; ptosis; broad nasal root; oligodontia; thin upper and full lower lip; lip nodules Persistent fetal pads; brachy- or clinodactyly; lax joints; hip dislocation Limb/extremity features Microcephaly Short stature Heart Kidney Sum Up to 1 point (0-1 features = 0 point; 2-4 = 1 point) 1 point 1 point 1 point 1 point 0-10 From Wang YR, Xu NX, Wang J, Wang XM. Kabuki syndrome: review of the clinical features, diagnosis and epigenetic mechanisms. World J Pediatr. 2019;15:528-535. Table 1. septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, coarctation of the aorta, pulmonary stenosis, aortic stenosis, and vascular ring. Respiratory: Obstructive sleep apnea is common. Genitourinary: Kidney anomalies include hydronephrosis and dupli- cations. Many males have cryptorchidism. Gastrointestinal: Feeding problems due to gastroesophageal reflux and constipation are common. Musculoskeletal: Joint laxity, scoliosis, and vertebral abnormalities can be seen. Hypotonia is common. Molecular diagnosis: This can be made using a gene panel (sequenc- ing and deletion/duplication analyses of CREBBP and EP300). For individuals with clinical features with atypical RSTS features, exome sequencing is recommended. B Fig. 102.2 Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. A, A 21-month-old child. Note the hirsutism, down-slanting palpebral fissures, maxillary hypoplasia, prominent nose with nasal septum extending below alae nasi, and low, posteriorly rotated ears. B, Broad thumbs with radial angulation and persistent fingertip pads. (A courtesy Dr. Marilyn C. Jones, Children's Hospital, San Diego, California; from Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 1C, p. 108 and Fig. 2C, p. 109.) Clinical Features of RSTS Physical features: Characteristic facial features include arched eyebrows, down-slanting palpebral fissures, low-hanging columella, and gri- macing smile. Individuals often have broad thumbs and/or halluces. Growth: Prenatal growth is usually normal, but most individuals have short stature caused by slow postnatal growth. Obesity may be seen during childhood or adolescence. Development: Global developmental delay is typical with milder fea- tures often seen in individuals with EP300 pathogenic variants. The average age of walking is 30 months and first words 25 months. Speech delay occurs in 90% of children and some remain nonverbal. Features of autism spectrum disorder, as well as impulsivity, dis- tractibility, mood instability, and stereotypies can be seen. Intellectual disability: This is in the moderate to severe range is typical for individuals with RSTS, with an IQ range of 25-79. Verbal ability is typically poorer than other skills. Neurologic: Craniospinal and posterior fossa abnormalities, such as Chiari malformation or cervical cord compression, can be seen as well as seizures or abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG). Eye findings: These can include refractory errors, ptosis, cataracts, coloboma, nystagmus, strabismus, and glaucoma. Congenital heart defects: These are seen in ~30% of individuals with RSTS. Common defects include atrial septal defect, ventricular CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CLS; MIM 122470) is character- ized by craniofacial features including synophrys, high-arched eyebrows and thin downturned upper lip, hirsutism, intellectual disability, microcephaly, growth retardation, limb anomalies, such as micromelia, phocomelia, and oligodactyly, and several other sys- temic abnormalities. Its population incidence is approximately 1 in 50,000. Molecular Mechanism of CdLS CdLS is caused by pathogenic variants in genes encoding the struc- tural and regulatory components of the cohesin complex. Variants have been found in NIPBL, HDAC8, RAD21, SMC1A, and SMC3 in CdLS. The cohesin complex is composed of SMCIA, SMC3, RAD21, and other subunits that comprise a ringlike structure that "embraces" chromatin. NIPBL encodes a protein that controls cohesin complex genome loading. The SMC3 component of the cohesin complex becomes acetylated once loaded onto the genome and is subsequently deacetylated by HDAC8 for cohesin protein recycling. Pathogenic variants in BRD4 are an infrequent cause of CdLS. Cohesin has shown to play a key role in transcriptional regulation, and global transcrip- tional alterations due to cohesin dysfunction are thought to lead to the pathogenesis of CdLS. NIPBL pathogenic variants are found in approximately 60% of the individuals with CdLS and are more likely to be identified in more severely (or "classically") affected individuals, with loss-of-function variants resulting in a more severe phenotype. Pathogenic variants in SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21, HDAC8, and BRD4 can be found in 1-5% of the individuals with CLS. Pathogenic variants in all related genes are -ypically acquired de novo, although instances of inherited variants from minimally affected mothers have been noted for the X-linked HDAC8 and SMC1A genes. 

798 Part VIII • Human Genetics Clinical Manifestations of CdLS Facial features: Include synophrys with highly arched and/or thick eyebrows, long/thick eyelashes, short nasal bridge, upturned nasal tip with anteverted nares, long and/or smooth philtrum, thin ver- milion of the upper lip, downturned corners of the mouth, highly arched palate with or without cleft palate, small widely spaced teeth, and micrognathia (Fig. 102.3). Growth failure: Prenatal-onset growth failure and microcephaly are common. Ophthalmologic: Common manifestations include ptosis, myopia, and nystagmus. Otolaryngologic: Sensorineural hearing impairment is common, but conductive hearing loss can be seen. Cardiovascular: Approximately 50% of individuals with CdLS have congenital heart disease. The most common abnormalities include pulmonic or peripheral pulmonic stenosis, ventricular septal de- fects, atrial septal defects, coarctation or hypoplastic aortic arch, aortic valve anomaly, tetralogy of Fallot, double-outlet right ventri- cle, and atrioventricular canal. Gastrointestinal: Gastroesophageal reflux disease is present in nearly all instances, and some require a feeding tube during infancy/child- hood. Other rare gastrointestinal abnormalities include pyloric ste- nosis (4%), intestinal malrotation (2%), and CDH (1%). Genitourinary. Renal abnormalities such as vesicoureteral reflux and cryptorchidism are common. Skeletal: Severe abnormalities of the upper extremities are seen in 25% of individuals with classical CdS. Upper extremity deficiencies range from severe reduction defects such as complete absence of the forearms to mild fifth finger clinodactyly (see Fig. 102.3). Radioul- nar synostosis is also common. Skin: Hypertrichosis is common, and scalp hair, typically thick, can extend onto the temporal regions. Developmental delay/intellectual disability: Most individuals with classical CLS demonstrate global developmental delay. The overall range of IQ levels is broad, from below 30 to 85, with an average IQ of 53. Those affected individuals with classic features are more likely to have severe to profound intellectual disability. Fifty per- cent of children with CdLS walk by 24 months and 95% by 10 years old. A range of behavioral issues have been reported, and behavior problems are often directly related to frustration from an inability Neurologic: Approximately 25% of individuals with CdLS experience Molecular Diagnosis of CdLS: Due to a relatively high frequency of mosaic variants not detected in blood, a next-generation sequenc- ing panel of CdLS genes (NIPBL, SMCIA, HDAC8, SMC3, RAD21, and BRD4) performed on DNA extracted from buccal cells has been recommended as the most effective way of detecting causal variants. For individuals with atypical CdLS features, exome sequencing is recommended. Fig. 102.3 Physical features of Cornelia de Lange syndrome. A, Patient with NIPBL c.3100_3106del; p.K1034QfsX7 pathogenic variant. Dysmorphic fea- tures include synophrys, long eyelashes, upturned na- sal tip with anteverted nares, long philtrum, and micro- gnathia. Severe reduction defects of upper extremities are also depicted. B, Patient with SMC1A c.2077C>G; p.R693G mutation. Dysmorphic features include mild synophrys. Fig. 102.4 Coffin-Siris syndrome. Note the coarse face and wide mouth with full lips (A), and hypoplastic fifth fingernails (B). (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 1A and 1D, p. 819.) COFFIN-SIRIS SYNDROME Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is characterized by thick eyebrows, perior- bital fullness, wide mouth with full lips, and coarse facial features; fifth fingernail hypoplasia; absence of terminal phalanges; hypertrichosis; developmental delay/intellectual disability; and short stature (Fig. 102.4). Molecular Mechanism of CSS CSS is typically caused by de novo heterozygous germline pathogenic variants in genes encoding a component of BAF (BRG1/hBRM-associated factors) complex, which belongs to the SWI/SNF chromatin remod- eler complex family. Pathogenic variants have been found in ARIDIA, ARIDIB, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, SMARCE1, and SOX11. Variants in one of these genes can be found in ~60-70% of the patients with CSS. Clinical Features of CSS Facial features: Characteristic facial features of CSS include wide mouth with thick, everted upper and lower lips, broad nasal bridge with broad nasal tip, thick eyebrows, and long eyelashes. Facial fea- tures typically coarsen over time. Growth: Prenatal growth profile tends to be normal, but postnatal weight and height measurements are usually below the 50th percentile. Development: Global developmental delay is common and variable; children sit around 12 months, walk at around 30 months, and say their first words at 24 months. Most individuals have intellectual dis- ability, typically moderate to severe (IQ range: 40-69). Some individu- als with CSS have behavioral concerns, aggression, or autistic features. Neurologic: The majority of children with CSS have hypotonia. Struc- tural brain malformations such as Dandy-Walker variant, and 

agenesis of the corpus callosum may be seen. Seizures occur in up to 50% of individuals. Hearing impairment can occur. Ophthalmology: Visual impairment is common, and ocular abnor- malities include ptosis, strabismus and myopia. Gastrointestinal: Feeding issues and slow growth are common. Genitourinary: Renal malformation such as horseshoe kidney, and genitourinary malformation such as cryptorchidism and hypospa- dias have been noted. Musculoskeletal: Fifth digit nail and distal phalanx hypoplasia or apla- sia, a diagnostic criterion in the pre-exome era, is commonly seen. Brachydactyly of the fifth finger, joint laxity, and scoliosis are also frequent. Cardiac: Congenital heart defects can be seen and include ventricular septal defects, atrial septal defects, and tetralogy of Fallot. Skin: Hirsutism and hypertrichosis are typical. Molecular Diagnosis of CSS For those whom clinical diagnosis of CSS is strongly suspected, CSS gene sequencing and deletion/duplication panel is recommended. For those with atypical clinical features, comprehensive genetic testing such as exome sequencing is warranted. OTHER CHROMATIN DISORDERS An increasing number of genetic disorders, due to mutations in genes encoding chromatin transcriptional regulatory proteins, have been identified. These disorders include CHARGE syndrome due to CHD7 pathogenic variants, Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome due to KMT2A pathogenic variants, Arboleda-Tham syndrome due to KAT6A pathogenic variants, and Say-Barber-Biesecker/Young- Simpson syndrome due to KAT6B pathogenic variants. CHD7 is a chromatin remodeler protein with a chromodomain histone- modification recognition motif. KAT6A and KAT6B encode histone modification enzymes. Common manifestations of genetic diagno- ses due to these chromatin remodelers and histone modification enzyme defects include developmental delay, hypotonia, and facial dysmorphisms. Some of the clinical features enable astute clinicians to distinguish between typical cases of these syndromes. However, in their atypical presentations, a clinical diagnosis may not be feasible. Exome sequencing is recommended in any children with facial dys- morphisms as well as developmental delay to detect possible chro- matin disorders. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 103 Genetics of Common Disorders Neil A. Hanchard and Brendan Lee Common pediatric diseases, like many common adult-onset diseases, are usually multifactorial. The combination of many genes and envi- ronmental factors contribute to a complex sequence of events leading to disease. The complexity of the combination of contributing factors increases the challenge of finding genetic variants that cause disease Genetic tools include public databases of genetic variants and the human haplotype map. Genotyping has permitted very large numbers of common genetic variants (those with population frequencies >5%) to be efficiently tested in large numbers of patients. Genetic sequenc- ing technologies are being used to investigate the role of rare coding Chapter 103 • Genetics of Common Disorders 799 sequence variants in common diseases. The incorporation of these tools into large, well-designed population studies has developed into the field of genetic epidemiology. 103.1 Major Genetic Approaches to the Study of Common Pediatric Disorders Neil A. Hanchard and Brendan Lee Millions of genetic variants are present in every person. Many of these variants have no known impact on health, while others have a measur- able influence. Sometimes, sequence changes in a single gene consis- tently cause a disease, as seen with cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia; more often, specific genetic changes are insufficient to determine the manifestation of a specific medical condition by themselves. Rather, these changes can contribute indirectly or partially to the development of disease, and these are best conceptualized as modifiers of disease risk. Figure 103.1 demonstrates the relationship between variant fre- quency and the relative medical impact of the allele. The spectrum of variant impact ranges widely from a slightly increased risk of illness to predetermined, fully expressed disease. Studies aimed at discover- ing rare variants with strong health effects require only small sample populations to achieve statistical significance, whereas those studying common variants that contribute partially to the overall effect often require much larger sample sizes because of the small impact of mul- tiple variants. In many cases, genetic susceptibility is the result of the cumulative risk of many common variants. For common conditions, the genetic predisposition alone is not sufficient to cause disease. Everyone inher- its a different degree of disease vulnerability, which is then augmented by exposure to certain environmental or other factors. Figure 103.2 is a model for the contribution of common genetic variants to individual health. One goal of medical genetics is to identify the genes that contrib- ute to initial genetic susceptibility and help prevent the occurrence of disease, either by avoiding inciting environmental factors or by institut- ing interventions that reduce risk. For persons who cross the threshold of disease, the goal is to better understand the pathogenesis in the hope that this will suggest better approaches to treatment. Common genetic variation can also influence responses to medications and the risk of adverse drug reactions, as well as augments the impact of environmental Complex traits may be inherently difficult to study if the precision of diagnosis (phenotype) is low, as often occurs with neurobehavioral traits. A starting point in the genetic analysis of a complex trait, there- fore, is to obtain evidence in support of a genetic contribution and to estimate the relative strength of genetic and environmental factors. Complex traits typically exhibit familial clustering but are not trans- mitted in a distinct pattern as seen with classical mendelian autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance. Complex traits often show variation between groups of different ancestries, possibly reflecting the differ- ences in frequency and/or effect of genetic variants within these groups. Assessing the potential genetic contribution begins by determining whether the trait is seen among related individuals more often than in the general population. A common measure of familiality is the first-degree relative risk (usually designated by the symbol As), which is equal to the ratio of the prevalence rate in siblings and/or parents to the prevalence rate in the general population. The is for type 1 diabetes is about 15. The relative strength of genetic and nongenetic risk factors can be estimated by variance components analysis. The heritability of a trait is the estimate of the fraction of the total variance contributed by A minority of cases of common diseases such as diabetes may be caused by single-gene pathogenic variants (mendelian inheritance), chromosomal disorders, and other genomic disorders (see Chapter 629.4). However, these unique causes of the disease can provide impor- tant insight into the molecular pathways involved. Chromosomal regions with genes that might contribute to disease susceptibility have historically been located with linkage mapping, which locates regions 

800 Part VIII • Human Genetics Effect size 5.0 High 3.0 Intermediate 1.5 Modest LOW Rare alleles causing Mendelian disease Rare variants of small effect very hard to identify by genetic means 0.001 Very rare Rare Low-frequency variants with intermediate effect Fig. 103.2 Model for the influ- ence of gene-environment inter- action on genetic susceptibility to common diseases. Everyone inher- its common variants that determine initial genetic liability for disease risk. For multifactorial disorders, the initial genetic susceptibility is insufficient to produce disease on its own. Over time, exposure to environmental factors increases the likelihood of a disease state. Identi- tying the gene variants responsible for risk can lead to prevention strat- Disease Risk 0.005 Low frequency Allele frequency Disease threshold Genetic susceptibility Prenatal Phenotypic variance = Genetic Environmental Measurement variance variance variance VG + VE + VM h2 = Va/ Vp Heritability Fig. 103.3 Heritability concept. The phenotypic variance of a particu- lar trait can be partitioned between the contributions of the genetic variance, environmental variance, and measurement variance. This is usually empirically determined. Heritability is defined by the proportion af the phe caty stimate the hera ilicy tuted or lay the ode quantia- tive trait between relatives. Few examples of high-effect common variants influencing common disease Common variants implicated in common disease by GWA 0.05 Common Fig. 103.1 Relationship between allele frequen- cy and relative strength of genetic effect. Alleles with large effect tend to be very rare but can be studied with a small sample size because of the relative ease of allele detection when medical impact is high. Common variants tend to have a modest or low effect on health, requiring large datasets to visualize statistically small effects. The vast majority of disease-associated alleles identi- fied to date have the characteristics shown within the diagonal dotted lines. GWA, Genome-wide as- sociation. (Adapted from McCarthy MI, Abecasis GR, Cardon LR, et al. Genome-wide association studies for complex traits: consensus, uncertainty and challenges. Nat Rev Genet. 2008;9:356-369.) Environmental nonta, Factor 6 Prevention A Path 4 Path 3 Environmental Factor Co Prevention A Environmental Factor A Prevention B Prevention C • Path 2 Environmental Factor B Path 1 Infancy Childhood Adolescence Adulthood Time of DNA that are inherited in families with the specific disease. In prac- tical terms, however, this has become quite difficult for most complex traits either because of a dearth of families or because the effects of individual genetic loci are weak; thus linkage mapping is seldom used Genetic association studies are a powerful way of identifying com- mon gene variants (>5% in the population) that each have an effect on the risk of disease. Detection of the usually small to moderate effect of each variant alongside interactions with environmental factors requires well-powered studies that often include thousands of individuals. A number of parallel approaches for analyzing the aggregate effects of rare variants in genes have also been developed. Such rare variant asso- ciation methods also require large sample sizes because the gene effects also appear to be relatively weak. 

What is an SNP? GGTAACTG Different people can have a different nucleotide or base at a given location on a chromosome GGCAACTG What is an SNP map? Location of SNPs on human DNA How can an SNP map be used to predict drug response? Human DNA Section of SNP genotype profile Patients with efficacy in clinical trials Patients without efficacy in clinical trials Predictive of efficacy Predictive of no efficacy Fig. 103.4 Different combinations of single nucleotide polymor- phisms (SNPs) are found in different individuals. The locations of these SNPs can be pinpointed on maps of human genes. Subsequently, they can be used to create profiles that are associated with difference in response to a drug, such as efficacy and nonefficacy. (Adapted from Roses A. Pharmacogenetics and the practice of medicine. Nature. 2000;405:857-865.) Association studies require markers along the DNA that can be genotyped (ascertaining the combination of alleles at a locus in a diploid organism), typically with large-scale, high-throughput labo- ratory techniques. Markers that are typically used are single nucle- otide polymorphisms (SNPs; Fig. 103.4). A sample of the same region of genome from 50 people will reveal that approximately 1 in every 200 bases varies between individuals. Catalogues of SNPs identified in thousands of individuals from multiple populations consist of tens of millions of SNPs across the genome (dbSNP; h ttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/). Although most SNPs lack an obvious function, some will alter the amino acid sequence of the protein, and many have been shown to regulate the expression of nearby or distant genes (https://gtexportal.org/home/ or indirectly impact expression by altering the level of surrounding DNA meth- ylation or the ability of proteins to act The ENCODE Project Con- sortium). Some of these functional alterations can directly affect susceptibility to disease. A complex clinical phenotype can be defined by the presence or absence of a disease as a dichotomous trait, or by selection of a clinically meaningful continuous or quantitative trait, such as serum glucose in type 2 diabetes. Although it might not be pos- sible to define subgroups of patients in advance based on disease mechanisms, the more uniform the phenotype, the more likely that a genetic study will be informative. Locus heterogeneity refers to the situation in which a similar trait results from alteration of dif- ferent genes. Allelic heterogeneity is when more than one variant in a particular gene can contribute to different diseases. The devel- opment of a trait or disease from a nongenetic mechanism results in a phenocopy. These three factors often contribute to the difficulty in identifying individual disease susceptibility genes, because they reduce the effective size of the study population and thus require even larger sample sizes. For genetic variants that directly lead to disease, a person bearing any variant or allele (inherited unit, DNA segment, or chromosome) in a gene has a given probability of being affected with a specific gene variant-associated disease. This is called the penetrance. Some dis- eases manifest signs only later in life (age-related penetrance), which could lead to misclassifying children with the disease-producing vari- ant to be classified as unaffected. Single-gene disorders are typically caused by pathogenic variants with relatively high penetrance. In con- trast, most common variants have low penetrance because their over- all contribution to the disease is small. Many such common variants Chapter 103 • Genetics of Common Disorders 801 can contribute to disease risk for a complex trait; for example, human height is influenced by >400 genes. Ideally, important environmental exposures should be measured and accounted for in a population because there may be a dependent interaction between the environmental factor and specific genetic vari- ant. An example is the likely requirement for a viral infection preceding onset of type 1 diabetes. Although gene-environment interactions are strongly suspected to play an important role in common diseases, it is difficult to identify and measure them. Very large studies with uniform collection of information about environmental exposures are rare, but are becoming more common with the expansion of large bioreposito- ries that are integrated with electronic health records. Methods, such as genome-wide analyses of DNA methylation, sometimes referred to as epigenome-wide association studies, have been used to assess evidence for early environmental exposures that influence common diseases in later life. This apparent relationship between the environment and DNA methylation (and related genetic features) is being used to dis- cover and validate other possible gene-environment interactions. GENOME-WIDE APPROACHES TO ASSOCIATION For multifactorial common diseases, association analyses have been used to identify disease-related genes. There are two types of asso- ciation study: direct association, in which the risk-altering variant itself is tested to see whether its presence correlates with disease, and indirect association, in which markers that are physically close to the biologically important variant are used as proxies. The correlation of markers with other genetic variants in a small region of the genome is called linkage disequilibrium. Indirect association is enabled by the construction of linkage disequilibrium maps in continental refer- ence populations (e.g., Europeans, Asians, West Africans) (Interna- tional HapMap Project). SNPs that proxy most genetic variation have been identified across most of the genome and can be genotyped at low cost using specially designed microarrays that typically include 2-5 million genetic markers. This resolution provides a good proxy of genetic variation in relatively homogenous populations where linkage disequilibrium is generally high (such as Europeans), thus facilitating "genome-wide" testing of variants in those populations. Three basic study designs are used for association testing: 1. Case-control design: the frequency of an allele in an affected group is compared with an unaffected group. This is the mostly commonly used framework for association testing, as it aligns with many more traditional epidemiologic study designs. 2. Cohort design: large numbers of people are ascertained and then followed for the onset of any number of diseases. Cohort analy- sis is very expensive, and there are few true cohort studies. How- ever, investments in genomics of large-scale population-based co- horts in Iceland (https://www.decode.com/), the United Kingdom (https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/), and the United States (https://allof us.nih.gov/) include hundreds of thousands of individuals all tied to electronic health records and have begun to show unique insights to disease risk and pathogenesis. 3. Family-based control design: parents or siblings of an affected in- dividual are used as the controls. Family-based control study designs are somewhat attractive for pediatric diseases because it is usually possible to enroll parents. These studies also solve a major problem in testing for association because the parents are perfectly matched for genetic background; however, family-based study designs are inherently less efficient to recruit than case-control studies and are used less commonly. The success of any association analysis depends on the design of a well-powered study and an accurately measured trait to avoid pheno- typic misclassification. In large, population-based studies, confound- ing by ethnicity or population stratification, could distort results. Variants more common in people from a particular ancestry group could cause an apparent association of a variant with a disease. This association would not be a true association between an allele and a disease, because the association would be confounded by genetic back- ground. Methods for measuring subtle mismatching between cases and controls using many thousands of markers routinely genotyped 

802 Part VIII • Human Genetics in genome-wide association studies allow researchers to account for this effect. The implementation of stringent thresholds for statistical significance replicate associations in other groups have helped make genome-wide association studies robust and reproducible. Association studies are a powerful tool to find genetic variation that confers risk to an individual; however, the effect of any single genetic variant will be a small contribution to the overall risk and pathogenesis of disease. Hundreds of thousands of genetic associa- tions between a variant or gene and disease, such as the APOE£4 allele with an increased risk of Alzheimer disease, have now been observed for thousands of complex diseases and traits, including autoimmune disease, asthma, and bone density/fractures. Genetic variants that implicate a novel gene in a process drive research into systems and pathways that can alter disease outcome. With increasingly large data- sets and advances in statistical analyses, all the genetic variants that impact common disease risk can also be combined to derive a com- posite genetic risk score. This score can then be integrated with known environmental risk factors to identify individuals at particularly high risk of disease who might require more urgent intervention or moni- toring. In adults, this approach is being developed to identify individ- uals at high risk for coronary heart disease, although concerns about how well genetic risk scores work in different population groups are yet to be overcome. Low-cost methods for sequencing the complete coding (exomes) and full DNA sequence (genomes) of individuals have facilitated com- prehensive evaluation of a wider range of genetic variants involved in common diseases. Rare genetic variants, including small insertions or deletions, are important in pediatric diseases such as neurodevel- opmental disorders, cardiovascular malformations, and other birth defects. Common traits such as height, obesity, diabetes, and autoim- mune diseases are also affected by rare variants. In common severe dis- orders such as intellectual disability and complex heart malformations, de novo pathogenic variants (i.e., pathogenic variants not present in either parent) play an important role. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 