Nutrition PART V Chapter 60 Nutritional Requirements Martine Saint-Cyr, Stephanie W. Waldrop, and Nancy F. Krebs Nutrition for infants, children, and adolescents should maintain cur- rent weight and support normal growth and development. Growth during infancy is rapid, critical for neurocognitive development, and has the highest energy and nutrient requirements relative to body size compared with any other period of growth. It is followed by growth during childhood, when 60% of total growth occurs, and finally by puberty. Nutrition and growth during the first 3 years of life pre- dict adult stature and some health outcomes. Although the anteced- ents are numerous and occur earlier, the major risk period for linear growth faltering or stunting (length- or height-for-age z score ≤-2) is between 6 and 24 months of age. Therefore it is critical to identify nutrient deficiencies promptly and to address them aggressively early in life, because missing them can impart lasting adverse effects on later growth and development. Dietary intake should meet energy requirements, as well as provide the essential macronutrients and micronutrients needed for sustain- ing the function of multiple vital processes. Nutrient deficiencies can limit growth, impair immune function, affect neurodevelopment, and increase morbidity and mortality. Worldwide, malnutrition and under- nutrition are the leading causes of acquired immunodeficiency and a major factor underlying morbidity and mortality in children <5 years The transition in food supply and the type of nutrition chosen in many developing countries from a traditional to Western diet has resulted in increased life expectancy and adult stature. It is associated with decreases in the incidence of communicable diseases. Unfortu- nately, the Western diet, characterized by high energy density, more refined grains, and highly processed foods, is also frequently accompa- nied by decreased physical activity and increases in the incidence and prevalence of noncommunicable diseases such as type 2 diabetes, car- diovascular (CV) disease, obesity, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and certain cancers. Consequently, it is important to view the impact of diet and nutrition on health from various perspectives: to prevent deficiency, to promote adequacy, and to prevent or reduce the risk for acquiring diseases associated with excess intakes, such as obesity, dia- betes, and CV disease. Advances in our understanding of the roles of some nutrients such as vitamin D, polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), and fiber have changed our focus from recommendations about preventing deficiency to recommendations about nutritional intake associated with optimal health. The 2006 World Health Organization (WHO) growth charts, recommended for all infants and children until age 2 years, are not only descriptive but also prescriptive on how children with adequate nutri- tion and healthcare should grow. Identifying and providing appropri- ate and adequate nutrition in infancy and childhood are critical to supporting normal growth and development, as well as providing the foundation for lifelong health and well-being. DIETARY REFERENCE INTAKES The dietary reference intakes (DRI) were established by the Food and Nutrition Board of the U.S. Institute of Medicine (IOM), currently 388 known as the National Academy of Medicine (NAM), to provide guid- ance on the nutrient needs for individuals and groups across different life stages and according to gender (Tables 60.1-60.3 and see Tables 60.5 and 60.6). The DRI represent a series of indicators that are used as a basis for macronutrient and micronutrient intake recommendations for healthy populations within the United States and Canada. The DRI also serve as an estimation of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2020-2025 (DGA) Daily Nutritional Goals. DRI indicators include the estimated Table 60.1 Equations to Estimate Energy Requirements INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN: EER (KCAL/DAY) = TEE + ED 0-3 mo 4-6 mo 7-12 mo 13-36 mo EER = (89 x weight [kg] - 100) + 175 EER = (89 x weight [kg] - 100) + 56 EER = (89 x weight [kg] - 100) + 22 EER = (89 x weight [kg] - 100) + 20 CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS 3-18 YR: EER (KCAL/DAY) = TEE + ED BOYS 3-8 уг 9-18 yr EER = 88.5 - (61.9 x age [yr] + PA × [(26.7 x weight [kg] + (903 x height [m])] + 20 EER = 88.5 - (61.9 x age [yr] + PA × [(26.7 x weight [kg] + (903 x height [m])] + 25 GIRLS 3-8 yr EER = 135.3 - (30.8 x age [yr] + PA [(10 x weight [kg] + (934 x height [m])] + 20 9-18 yr EER = 135.3 - (30.8 x age [yr] + PA [(10 x weight [kg) + (934 x height [m])] + 25 EER, Estimated energy requirement; TEE, total energy expenditure; ED, energy deposition (energy required for growth /new tissue accretion). PA indicates the physical activity coefficient: For boys: PA = 1.00 (sedentary, estimated physical activity level 1.0-1.4); PA = 1.13 (low active, estimated physical activity level 1.4-1.6); PA = 1.26 (active, estimated physical activity level 1.6-1.9); PA = 1.42 (very active, estimated physical activity level 1.9-2.5) For girls: PA = 1.00 (sedentary, estimated physical activity level 1.0-1.4); PA = 1.16 (low active, estimated physical activity level 1.4-1.6); PA = 1.31 (active, estimated physical activity level 1.6-1.9); PA = 1.56 (very active, estimated physical activity level 1.9-2.5) Adapted from Kleinman RE (ed). Pediatric Nutrition Handbook, 7th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2013. Table 60.2 Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Ranges MACRONUTRIENT Fat 06 PUFAs (linoleic acid) 03 PUFAs (a-linolenic acid) Carbohydrate Protein AMDA (% OF ENERGY) AGE 1-3 YR 30-40 5-10 0.6-1.2 45-65 5-20 AGE 4-18 YR 25-35 5-10 0.6-1.2 45-65 10-30 PUFAs, Polyunsaturated fatty acids. Adapted from Otten JJ, Hellwig JP, Meyers LD (eds). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine, National Academies Press; 2006. 

Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements 389 Table 60.3 Dietary Reference Intakes: Macronutrients LIFE STAGE RDA OR AI* FUNCTION GROUP (g/day) TOTAL DIGESTIBLE CARBOHYDRATE RDA based on its role as the Infants primary energy source for 0-6 mo the brain 7-12 mo AMDR based on its role as a Children source of kcal to maintain body weight >1 yr 60* 95* 130 Pregnancy ≤18 yr 19-30 yr 175 175 TOTAL FIBER Improves laxation, reduces risk of coronary artery (heart) disease, assists in maintaining normal blood glucose levels Infants 0-6 mo 7-12 mo Children 1-3 yr 4-8 yr Males 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr Females 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr Pregnancy ≤18 yr 19-21 yr TOTAL FAT When sund in foods, is a source of 03 and 06 Facilitates absorption of fat-soluble vitamins Infants 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 1-18 yr 06 POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS Esseutal membranot Infants 0-6 mo lipids, involved with cell 7-12 mo Precuasir of eicosanoids Children Required for normal skin 1-3 yr function 4-8 yr Males 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr Females 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr Pregnancy ≤18 yr 19-21 yr Lactation ≤18 yr 19-21 yr ND ND 19* 25* 31* 38* 38* 26* 26* 25* 28* 28* 31* 30* Insufficient evidence to determine Al or EAR; see AMDR, Table 60.2. 4.4* 4.6* 7* 10* 12* 16* 17* 10* 11* 12* 13* 13* 13* 13* SELECTED FOOD SOURCES ADVERSE EFFECTS OF EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION Major types: starches and sugars, grains, and vegetables (corn, pasta, rice, potatoes, and breads) are sources of starch. Natural sugars are found in fruits and No defined intake level for potential adverse effects of total digestible carbohydrate is identified, but the upper end of the AMDR was based on decreasing risk of chronic disease and providing adequate intake of other Sources of added sugars: soft drinks, candy, fruit drinks, desserts, syrups, It is suggested that the maximal intake of added sugars be limited to providing no more than 10% of energy. Includes dietary fiber naturally present in grains (e.g., oats, wheat, unmilled rice) and functional fiber synthesized or isolated from plants or animals and shown to be of benefit to health. Dietary fiber can have variable compositions; therefore it is difficult to link a specific source of fiber with a particular adverse effect, especially when phytate is also present in the natural fiber source. As part of an overall healthy diet, a high intake of dietary fiber will not produce deleterious effects in healthy persons. Occasional adverse Gl symptoms are observed when consuming some isolated or synthetic fibers, but serious chronic adverse effects have not been observed because of the bulky nature of fibers. Excess consumption is likely to be self- limiting; therefore UL was not set for individual functional fibers. Infants: Human milk or infant formula UL is not set because there is no defined Older children: Butter, margarine, intake of fat at which adverse effects occur. vegetable oils, whole milk, visible High fat intake will lead to obesity. Upper fat on meat and poultry products, end of AMDR is also based on reducing invisible fat in fish, shellfish, some risk of chronic disease and providing plant products such as seeds and adequate intake of other nutrients. t nuts, bakery products. Low fat intake (with high carbohydrate) has been shown to increase plasma triacyl- glycerol concentrations and decrease HDL cholesterol. Nuts, seeds; vegetable oils such as soybean, safflower, corn oil. There is no defined intake of u6 level at which adverse effects occur. Upper end of AMDR is based on the lack of evidence that demonstrates long-term safety and human in vitro studies that show increased free radical formation and lipid peroxidation with higher amounts of wo fatty acids. Lipid peroxidation is thought to be a component of atherosclerotic plaques. Continued 

390 Part V • Nutrition Table 60.3 Dietary Reference Intakes: Macronutrients-cont'd LIFE STAGE RDA OR AI* FUNCTION GROUP (g/day) 03 POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS Involved with neurologic Infants development and growth 0-6 mo Precursor of eicosanoids 7-12 mo 0.5* 0.5* Children 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 0.7* 0.9* Males 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 1.2* 1.6* 1.6* Females 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 1.0* 1.1* 1.1* Pregnancy ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 1.4* 1.4* Lactation ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 1.3* 1.3* SATURATED AND TRANS FATTY ACIDS The body can synthesize its needs for saturated fatty No dietary requirement acids from other sources. SELECTED FOOD SOURCES ADVERSE EFFECTS OF EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION Vegetable oils (e.g., soybean, canola, No defined intake levels for potential flaxseed oil); fish oils, fatty fish, adverse effects of 03 PUFAs are walnutst; smaller amounts in meats identified. and eggs. Upper end of AMDR is based on maintaining appropriate balance with wo fatty acids and the lack of evidence that demonstrates long-term safety, along with human in vitro studies that show increased free radical formation and lipid peroxidation with higher amounts of PUFAs. Because the longer-chain n-3 fatty acids, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), are biologically more potent than their precursor, linolenic acid, much of the work on adverse effects of this group of fatty acids has been on DHA and EPA. Lipid peroxidation is thought to be a component in the development of atherosclerotic plaques. There is an incremental increase in plasma total and LDL cholesterol concentrations with increased intake of saturated or trans fatty acids; therefore saturated fat intake should be limited to < 10% with no trans fat.# Saturated fatty acids are present in animal fats (meat fats and butter fat) and coconut and palm kernel Trans fat: stick margarines, foods containing hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated vegetable shortenings CHOLESTEROL No dietary requirement Sources: liver, eggs, foods that contain eggs (e.g., cheesecake, custard pie, PROTEIN AND AMINO ACIDS Major structural component Infants of all cells in the body 0-6 mo Functions as enzymes, in 7-12 mo membranes, as transport 9.1* 11.0 carriers, and as some Children hormones 1-3 yr During digestion and 4-8 yr 13 19 absorption, dietary protein is broken down to amino Males acids, which become the 9-13 yr building blocks of these 14-18 yr structural and functional ≥19 yr 34 52 56 compounds Females Nine indispensable amino 9-13 yr acids must be provided ≥14 yr 34 46 in the diet; the body can Proteins from animal sources (e.g., meat, poultry, fish, eggs, milk, cheese, yogurt) provide all nine indispensable amino acids in adequate amounts and are considered "complete proteins." Protein from plants, legumes, grains, nuts, seeds, and vegetables tend to be deficient in ≥1 of the indispensable amino acids and are called "incomplete proteins." Vegan diets adequate in total promplete ey combining sources of incomplete protein, which lack different indispensable amino acids. No defined intake levels for potential adverse effects of protein are identified. Upper end of AMDR was based on complementing AMDR for carbohydrate and fat for the various age-groups. Lower end of AMDR is set at approximately the RDA. make the other amino ≤18 yr acids needed to synthesize 19-21 yr specific structures from Pregnancy 46 71 other amino acids and lactation Note Seed i be For detente A ts, elite mAine. The Ali or hot be aged and gender indis is infie Do over she mes tall me of 7.90% group, but lack of data prevents specifying with confidence the percentage covered by this intake. AMDR is the range of intake for a particular energy source that is associated with reduced risk of chronic disease while providing intakes of essential nutrients. With consumption in excess of the AMDR, there is a potential for increasing the risk of chronic diseases and/or insufficient intakes of essential nutrients. ND amounts are not determinable because of a lack of data regarding adverse effects in this age-group and concern with regard to a lack of ability to handle excess amounts. Source of intake should be from food only to prevent high levels of intake. +2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/. *Based on 1.5 g/kg/day for infants, 1.1 g/kg/day for 1-3 yr, 0.95 g/kg/day for 4-13 yr, 0.85 g/kg/day for 14-18 yr, 0.8 g/kg/day for adults, and 1.1 g/kg/day for pregnant (using pre- pregnancy weight) and lactating women. Al, Adequate intake; AMDR, acceptable macronutrient distribution range; EAR, estimated average requirement; Gl, gastrointestinal; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; ND, not determinable; PUFAs, polyunsaturated fatty acids; RDA, recommended dietary allowance; UL, upper limit of normal. Institute of Medicine. 2005. Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and Amino Acids. https://doi.org/10.17226/10490. Adapted and reproduced with permission from the National Academy of Sciences, Courtesy of the National Academies Press, Washington, DC. 

average requirement (EAR), the recommended dietary allowance (RDA), and the tolerable upper limit of intake (UL) (Figs. 60.1 and 60.2). In addition, the concept of the DRI is also applicable to the esti- mated energy requirement (EER) and the acceptable macronutrient distribution range (AMDR). The EAR is an estimated average of the dally nutrient intake required to meet the nutritional needs of 50% of the population; it is applied to the assessment of a population's intake. The RDA provides an esti- mate of the minimum daily average intake for a nutrient that meets the nutritional needs for more than 97% of individuals in a population, and it can be used as a guideline for individuals to avoid deficiency. When an EAR cannot be derived, an RDA cannot be calculated; therefore an adequate intake (AI) is developed as a guideline for individuals based on the best available data and scientific consensus. The UL denotes the highest average daily intake with no associated adverse health effects for almost all individuals in a given population. Figure 60.2 shows the relationships among EAR, RDA, and UL. Energy balance constitutes both caloric intake, most often derived from food, and metabolic caloric expenditure. An imbalance between energy intake and energy expenditure can lead to undesirable health consequences. Inadequate energy intake can lead to weight faltering, catabolism of body tissues (e.g., fat and muscle), diminished immu- nity, and increased morbidity and mortality. For infants, children, and adolescents, acute or chronic energy deficits can adversely affect EAR 50% — 50% 34% 34% RDA 2.5% - 3 SD - 2 SD 13.5% -1 SD 13.5% 2.5% +1 SD +2 SD +3 SD Mean Percentile Median rank 2.5 16 50 84 97.5 Fig. 60.1 Dietary reference intakes. Normal requirement distribution of hypothetical nutrient showing percentile rank and placement of the estimated average requirement (EAR) and the recommended dietary allowance (RDA) on the distribution; SD, standard deviation. Risk of inadequacy 0.5 EAR RDA 1.0 UL 0.5 0.0 0.0 Observed level of intake Fig. 60.2 Dietary reference intakes: The relationship among the es- timated average requirement (EAR), the recommended dietary allow- ance (RDA), and the tolerable upper limit of intake (UL). This figure shows that the EAR is the intake at which the risk of inadequacy is esti- mated to be 0.5 (50%). The RDA is the intake at which the risk of inad- equacy would be very small, only 0.02-0.03 (2-3%). At intakes between the RDA and the UL, the risk of inadequacy and of excess are estimated to be close to 0.0. At intakes above the UL, the potential risk of adverse effects can increase. Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements 391 motor, cognitive, and behavioral development. Excess energy intake can increase the risk for obesity and obesity-related metabolic disease. Energy balance in adults is associated with maintenance of weight sta- tus. Positive energy balance is required in children to support growth. Components of energy expenditure in adults include the basal meta- bolic rate (BMR), which is primarily determined by lean body mass; the thermal effect of food (e.g., energy required for digestion and absorp- tion); energy for thermoregulation; and energy for physical activity. Energy needs are increased during infancy, childhood, pregnancy, and lactation, necessitating increased energy intakes during these life stages. The 2020-2025 DGA provides important nutrition and health top- ics applicable to each life stage, including data on estimates of caloric intake for healthy persons. The exact daily caloric requirement varies according to an individual's age, gender, height, weight, and physical activity, among other factors. Weight loss, weight maintenance, and weight gain depend on calories consumed and calories expended in The estimated energy requirement (EER) for infants, children, and adolescents is the average dietary energy intake predicted to maintain energy balance, ensure adequate growth and development, and provide for a desirable level of physical activity. It considers age, gender, weight, stature, and level of physical activity (see Table 60.1). The EER was determined based on empirical research in healthy persons at different levels of physical activity and is estimated by equations that account for both total energy expenditure (TEE) and energy deposition (ED) for healthy growth. EERs for infants, relative to body weight, are approxi- mately twice those for adults because of the increased metabolic rate and energy requirements for weight maintenance and growth. The EER was not devised for, and does not necessarily apply to, children with acute or chronic diseases who may have altered energy requirements due to chronic infection or inflammation, malabsorp- tion, febrile illnesses, chronic lung disease, congenital heart disease, or other conditions. In these situations, energy requirements are typically higher when compared with healthy matched peers. Con- versely, in some conditions, individuals may be hypometabolic and thus require less energy than expected (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypo- thalamic obesity conditions, Down syndrome, and certain syndromic or monogenic obesity disorders). Individual energy needs for healthy persons based on age, gender, height, weight, activity level, preg- nancy, or lactation status can be approximated using online tools, such as the DRI Calculator for Healthcare Professionals, available at https://www.nal.usda.gov/human-nutrition-and-food-safety/dri- Dietary nutrients that provide energy include fats (approximately 9 kcal/g), carbohydrates (4 kcal/g), and protein (4 kcal/g). These nutri- ents are called macronutrients. If alcohol is consumed, it also contrib- utes to energy intake (7 kcal/g). The EER does not specify the relative energy contributions of macronutrients. Once the minimal intake of each macronutrient is attained (e.g., sufficient protein intake to meet specific amino acid requirements, sufficient fat intake to meet linoleic acid and a-linolenic acid needs for brain development), the remainder of the intake is used to meet energy requirements, with some degree of freedom and interchangeability among fat, carbohydrate, and protein. This forms the basis for the acceptable macronutrient distribution ranges (AMDRs), expressed as a function of total energy intake (see Table 60.2). FAT Fat is the most calorically dense macronutrient, providing approxi- mately 9 kcal/g. For infants, human milk and formula are the main dietary sources of fat, whereas older children obtain fat from animal products, vegetable oils, margarine, and nuts and seeds. The AMDR for fats is 30-40% of total energy intake for children 1-3 years and 25-35% for children 4-18 years of age. In addition to being energy dense, lip- ids provide essential fatty acids that have structural and functional roles (e.g., cholesterol moieties are precursors for cell membranes, hormones, and bile acids). Fat intake also facilitates absorption of fat- soluble vitamins (vitamins A, D, E, and K). Both roles are relevant to neurologic and ocular development (see Table 60.3). 

392 Part V • Nutrition Dietary fats include phospholipids; free fatty acids; monoglycerides, diglycerides, and triglycerides; and sterols. Triglycerides are the most common form of dietary fat and are composed of one glycerol mol- ecule with three fatty acids. They are found in both animal and vegeta- ble fats. In addition, simple sugars (i.e., refined grains and high-sugar drinks) can be converted to triglycerides in the liver. In general, dietary fatty acids can be classified as saturated, unsaturated, and more specifi- cally, as monounsaturated or polyunsaturated. Dietary saturated fatty acids, found primarily in animal fat and dairy products as well as some vegetable fats (e.g., coconut and palm oil), can be synthesized endog- enously by the body and thus are not required in the diet. Medium- chain triglycerides (e.g., MCT oil) are beneficial for those suffering from malabsorptive disorders resulting in steatorrhea because of their direct absorption from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract into the blood- stream via the portal vein, bypassing the need for pancreatic and biliary secretory components. The dietary saturated fatty acids most com- monly consumed include myristic (C14), palmitic (C16), and steric acid (C18). Trans fatty acids are a type of unsaturated fat having undergone hydrogenation that alters the configuration of its double bond(s). They are found primarily in processed foods such as margarines and short- enings and are nonessential. A small amount of naturally occurring trans fats can be found in animal products and human breast milk Monounsaturated fatty acids are typically found in certain plants and their derived oils (e.g., avocado oil, olive oil, canola) and in some ani- mal fats. Because monounsaturated fatty acids can be synthesized by the liver, they are considered nonessential to the diet. Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are fatty acids not able to be synthesized de novo in the body and are necessary for maintenance of growth, skin integ- rity, aspects of central nervous system development, and other essen- tial physiologic functions such as regulation of immunity, and inflammation. These dietary essential fatty acids include linoleic (C18:2, W6,9) and linolenic acid (C18:3, W3,6,9), and they are discussed in more detail later. Neither monounsaturated nor polyunsaturated fatty acids contrib- ute adversely to plasma cholesterol levels. However, dietary saturated fatty acids (found primarily in animal fat and dairy products), trans fats (found in hydrogenated margarines and oils), and cholesterol increase the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) fraction of serum cholesterol, which is a risk factor for the development of atherosclerosis. Autopsy stud- ies demonstrate that atherosclerosis begins early in childhood, even in infancy. Therefore dietary advice to optimize CV health should be given starting from age 2 years, when sufficient fat intake to sustain growth and brain development is less of a concern. It is recommended that saturated fat make up less than 10% of total daily calories in the diet for those age 2 years and above, with increased focus on con- sumption of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats. Dietary trans fatty acids are to be avoided, particularly artificial trans fatty acids in the form of partially hydrogenated oils, which are no longer consid- ered Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Figure 60.3 shows the dietary contributions of saturated fat for those age 1 year and above. Because saturated and monounsaturated fats can be synthesized endogenously to support adequate structural and physiologic require- ments, there is no Al or RDA set for these dietary components. Trans fats, which have no known health benefits in humans, also do not have an Al or RDA defined. A UL has not been set for cholesterol, saturated, or trans fats because there is a continuous positive linear association between intake of these fats and increased risk for CV disease, without a threshold level. Diets low in saturated fats without trans fats are there- fore preferred. For optimal CV health in the general population, rather than limiting fat intake, advice should focus in most cases Pizza 5% Poultry, Excluding Deli & Mixed Dishes 4% Saturated Fat Average Intake: 239 calories/day Sandwiches 19% Eggs 3% Higher Fat Milk & Yogurt 6% Meat, Poultry & Seafood Mixed 4% Spreads 3% Desserts & Sweet Snacks 11% Meats. Excluding Deli & Mixed Dishes 3% Rice, Pasta & Other Grain-Based Mixed Dishes 7% Chips, Crackers & Savory Snacks 4% Other Sources 20% Starchy Vegetables 3% Ice Cream & Frozen Dally 88.9 Desserts Within Sandwiches: Cheese 4% Sandwiches Chicken & Turkey Danow ches ....... Vegetables, Excluding Starchy 4% 2% 3% Other Sandwiches 6% Burritos & Tacos 4% 1% Burgers 3% Within Desserts & Sweet Snacks: Cakes & Pies 2% ... Cookios & Brownies 4% 3% 2% Hotdog Sandwiches Doughnuts, Sweet Rolls & Pastries Fig. 60.3 Top sources and average intakes of saturated fat: U.S. population age 1 year and older. Estimates based on 2-day dietary intake data, weighted, from What We Eat in America (WWEIA), National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 2013-2016. (From Dietary Guide- lines for Americans. 2020-2025, Chapter 1: Nutrition and Health Across the Lifespan. Fig. 1.11. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/fil es/2020-12/Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020-2025.pdf.) 

on changing the type of fat consumed. Because of their high energy density, excessive intake of all types of fatty acids has the potential to increase the risk of obesity. Humans are incapable of synthesizing the precursor 3 (a-linolenic acid [ALA]) and 06 (linoleic acid [LA]) long-chain PUFAs and depend on diet for these two essential fatty acids. Walnut, canola, and flaxseed oil are good sources of ALA. Good sources of LA include safflower and sunflower oil. Essential fatty acids are enzymatically elongated and desaturated into longer-chain fatty acids (LC-PUFAs) that serve essential physiologic roles in the body. ALA can be converted to eicosa- pentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). LA is con- verted to arachidonic acid (ARA). The conversion of ALA to EPA and DHA and of LA to ARA is influenced by many factors, including type and amounts of dietary fats and by enzymatic substrate affinity among competing 03, 06, 09, saturated, and trans fatty acids. Approximately 0.5% of dietary ALA is converted to DHA, and 5% of ALA intake is converted to EPA; therefore dietary intake of LC-PUFAs is an impor- tant determinant of serum and tissue DHA and EPA status. LC-PUFAs such as DHA and ARA have a variety of cellular struc- tural and functional roles; they influence membrane fluidity and gene expression and modulate the inflammatory response. ARA and DHA are present in breast milk and reflect maternal intake. They are often supplemented in infant formulas and are important for optimal growth and development. DHA is highly concentrated in the retina and is involved in the visual evoked response in infants. Risk factors for essential fatty acid deficiency (i.e., deficiency of ALA and LA) include severe fat malabsorption, prematurity, and administration of fat-free parenteral nutrition. Deficiency can develop within 2-4 weeks of inadequate intake. Essential fatty acid deficiency of LA is associated with desquamating skin rashes, alopecia, throm- bocytopenia, impaired immunity, and growth deficits, but is rare in the general population. Deficiency of ALA has been associated with paresthesias, weakness, impaired gait, impaired vision, hemorrhagic folliculitis, and impaired wound healing. The biologic activity and health benefits of ALA are thought to be derived from its elongation products EPA and DHA. Consistent with the findings of limited conversion of ALA to EPA and DHA, the DRI stipulates that up to 10% of the AI for 03 PUFA (ALA being the major dietary constituent) can be replaced by DHA and EPA to support nor- mal neural development and growth. The ratio of dietary intake of each type of PUFA influences their relative amounts in different tissue com- partments. A dietary 06:03 PUFA ratio of 4-5:1 may be associated with improved health outcomes, compared with the current 15-30:1 ratio typically observed in U.S. diets. In general, 06 fatty acids tend to have more proinflammatory effects and 3 fatty acids more antiin- flammatory effects, which have potential implications for adjunctive nutritional management of chronic inflammatory conditions. Protein and amino acids have structural and functional roles in every cell in the body. Dietary protein intake is required to maintain and replenish the turnover of protein and to meet amino acid needs for growth. Dietary protein also provides approximately 4 kcal/g as an energy substrate when intake is in excess of needs or derived from endogenous sources during periods of catabolism. Inadequate energy intake or inadequate protein intake increases catabolism of body pro- tein reservoirs (i.e., lean body mass) for energy and free amino acids required to support normal physiologic function. Without adequate daily dietary protein intake, endogenous sources will be mobilized at the expense of function. Negative energy balance (weight loss) is asso- ciated with an obligatory negative nitrogen balance. Nitrogen from protein turnover is primarily excreted in urine and stool. Increased protein intake of up to 20-30% may be required during hypermetabolic states, as well as in those infants and children recov- ering from malnutrition. Certain conditions may require a modest increase in protein intake, including conditions with high protein turnover, such as cystic fibrosis, inflammatory conditions, critical ill- nesses, extensive burn injuries, compensated liver disease, and post- surgical states including bariatric surgery (e.g., laparoscopic sleeve Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements gastrectomy and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass). Premature infants also require increased protein intakes due to increased needs related to accelerated growth rates. In addition, athletes engaging in resistance, muscle-building training may have increased total protein needs of approximately 1.2-2.0 g/kg/day to prevent loss of lean body mass and to maintain nitrogen balance. Importantly, the increased pro- tein intake in these situations must occur in the context of adequate energy intake in order for protein deposition to occur, thus ensur- ing that protein is not used or catabolized for energy. Moderate to severe protein-energy malnutrition (PEM), although relatively rare in the non-institutionalized U.S. population, is more common in low- resource settings. Mild PEM occurs more commonly in the United States, leading children not to meet weight targets on growth curves. PEM impairs brain, immune system, and intestinal mucosal func- tions (see Chapters 62 and 64). The DRI for protein is provided in Table 60.3. Numerous factors influence dietary requirements for protein, including gender, age, growth stage, pregnancy, lactation, the presence of illness, the nutri- tional adequacy of an individual's diet, and genetics. The most impor- tant determinant of protein requirements is energy intake because insufficient energy intake will lead to protein catabolism to maintain energy balance, effectively increasing protein intake requirements. The EAR and RDA take into account protein required for growth and maintenance, but the RDA accounts for variation in requirements for a particular population that may exist as a result of differences in mainte- nance needs, protein accrual rates, and the efficiency of dietary protein accrual. Thus the RDA exceeds the EAR and most protein needs for individuals of a specific group. The average intake of protein from poultry, meat, eggs, nuts, seeds, and soy products differs by age and gender. According to the 2020- 2025 DGA and based on National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data from 2015 to 2016, the average daily intake of protein for males and females age 2-4 years and 5-8 years is within rec- ommended ranges. In children age 9-13 years, average protein intake barely meets the lower end of recommended intake for both males and females. For adolescents 14 years of age and above, males have average daily protein intakes within the recommended range; that for females falls short of the minimum recommended daily intake. A UL for pro- tein has not been set because of insufficient data; however, excessively high intakes can result in increased urinary calcium excretion that may increase the risk of renal calculi. Intake of protein or specific amino acids needs to be limited in some health conditions, such as renal dis- ease, decompensated liver disease, and metabolic diseases such as phe- nylketonuria and maple syrup urine disease, in which specific amino acids can be toxic. Conclusive evidence for harm in otherwise healthy individuals from high protein intakes is lacking. Protein intake neces- sary to meet micronutrient needs, especially during the first 2 years of postnatal life, will typically exceed recommended protein intakes, thus requiring micronutrient supplementation to prevent insufficiency or The amino acid content of dietary protein is also important. The standard by which a protein's quality is judged is its ability to support adequate growth. Certain amino acids are indispensable/essential, and humans depend on dietary sources to meet adequacy and prevent defi- ciency. Certain amino acids are termed conditionally indispensable, meaning they can be endogenously produced but require an exogenous source (i.e., diet) in certain disease conditions or during a certain life stage. An example would be the increased requirements for cysteine, tyrosine, and arginine in newborns because of enzyme immaturity (Table 60.4). DRI recommendations regarding protein intake assume adequate provision of indispensable amino acids and high digestibility. Human milk contains both the indispensable and conditionally indis- pensable amino acids and therefore meets the protein requirements for infants. Breast milk is considered the optimal protein source for infants and is the reference amino acid composition by which biologic qual- ity is determined for infants. If a single amino acid in a food protein source is low or absent but is required to support normal metabolism, that specific amino acid becomes the limiting nutrient in that food. Animal protein, unlike plant protein, contains sufficient indispensable 

394 Part V • Nutrition Table 60.4 INDISPENSABLE Histidine* soleucine Leucine Lysine Methionine Phenylalanine Threonine Tryptophan Valine Indispensable, Dispensable, and Conditionally Indispensable Amino Acids in the Human Diet DISPENSABLE NONSENSAALLY Alanine Aspartic acid Asparagine Glutamic acid Serine Arginine Cysteine Glutamine Glycine Proline Tyrosine PRECURSORS OF CONDITIONALLY INDISPENSABLE Glutamine/glutamate, aspartate Methionine, serine Glutamic acid/ammonia Serine, choline Glutamate Phenylalanine * though his dice is conside i definis an sale, unia diet you e ise adog enous sitest can no met me atlia of educing protein deposition and inducing negative nitrogen balance promptly on removal from the diet. Adapted from Otten JJ, Hellwig JP, Meyers LD (eds). Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine, National Academies Press; 2006. amino acids and typically is more digestible (>95%) than plant-source proteins (70-80%). To ensure appropriate growth and to promote satiety, children should consume the recommended amount of protein. Specific recom- mendations for appropriate dietary protein sources to meet indispens- able amino acid requirements are available for groups adopting specific diets, such as vegetarians and vegans. Including mixtures of protein sources (e.g., legumes and corn) and using a variety of food sources to provide all of the required amino acids are strategies advocated for vegetarians and vegans (see Chapter 61). CARBOHYDRATES Carbohydrates are abundant in many foods, including cereals, grains, fruits, and vegetables, and provide approximately 4 kcal/g of energy. Dietary carbohydrates include monosaccharides, which contain one sugar molecule (eg., glucose, fructose, galactose); disaccharides, which contain two sugar molecules (e.g., sucrose, lactose, maltose); oligosaccharides or polysaccharides, which contain multiple sugar molecules in a chain or complex configuration (e.g., starch, nonstarch polysaccharides like fiber); and sugar alcohols. Dietary carbohydrates are absorbed across the intestinal epithelium and converted to glucose in the liver. Glucose serves as the essential energy source for eryth- rocytes and the central nervous system and is a major energy source for all other cells. The requirements for carbohydrates are based on the average minimum amount of glucose used by the brain. Chronic low carbohydrate intake (e.g., less than 10% of total caloric intake) results in ketosis. Although a UL for carbohydrates has not been set, a maximal intake of < 10% of total energy intake from added sugars, such as syrups and other caloric sweeteners, has been proposed in the 2020-2025 DGA. Added sugars do not contribute essential nutrients and function to sweeten foods and beverages. Naturally occurring sugars, such as in milk (lactose) or fruits (fructose), are not included. Higher intakes of added sugar can displace other macronutrients and micronutri- ents and increase the risk for nutrient deficiency and excessive energy intake. There is no benefit from consuming added sugars as discretion- ary calorie intake. The excess calories from added sugars may displace more nutrient-dense foods and make it difficult to meet nutrient needs while remaining within the recommended total caloric intake. The recommended AMDR for carbohydrates is based on data sug- gesting a risk for coronary artery disease (CAD) with diets high in refined carbohydrates and low in fat (see Table 60.2). These diets, com- pared with diets with higher fat intake, result in high triglyceride levels, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, and small LDL choles- terol particles and are associated with an increased risk of CAD, espe- cially in sedentary overweight individuals. Diets within the AMDR for carbohydrates and fats minimize the risks of diabetes, obesity, and CAD. Diets with less than the minimum AMDR for carbohydrate most likely do not meet the Al for fiber (see Table 60.3). Most carbohydrates are present as starches or sugars in food. Sim- ple sugars (monosaccharides and disaccharides) are often added to foods and beverages during food preparation, processing, and packag- ing to enhance their palatability and also act as preservatives. Sugar- sweetened beverages, including nondiet soft drinks, juice drinks, iced tea, and sport drinks, are major contributors to added sugars in the diet of U.S. children and adolescents (Fig. 60.4). Added sugars are associ- ated with increased risk for obesity, diabetes, and dental caries. Fruc- tose is one such added sugar in the form of high-fructose corn syrup, which is ubiquitous in the U.S. diet. Added fructose increases HDL and triglyceride production in the liver and serum uric acid, which increases systolic blood pressure and is associated with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and metabolic syndrome. Excessive fructose intake, such as in the form of fruit juices, may be associated with diarrhea, abdominal pain, and failure to thrive in children. Fructose consumed in whole fruits rarely contributes to these side effects because its sys- temic absorption and metabolic effects are mitigated by the fact that it is complexed with fiber. The glycemic index is a measure of peak blood glucose concentra- tion 2 hours after ingestion of a given food compared with a reference standard (slice of white bread). The glycemic index has predictable eftects on blood glucose, hemoglobin A,c, insulin, triglycerides, and HDL cholesterol. Lower-glycemic-index foods are recommended and may reduce the risk of insulin resistance and CV disease. Examples of low-glycemic-index foods include oat bran, muesli, barley, carrots, nonstarchy vegetables, and most fruits. Fiber consists of nondigestible carbohydrates (i.e., nonstarch polysac- charides and nonpolysaccharides such as lignins), mostly derived from plant sources, such as whole grains, fruits, and vegetables, that escape digestion and reach the colon almost 100% intact. Fiber can be classi- fied as fermentable and nonfermentable. Fermentable fibers are found in beans, fruits, and products containing oats or psyllium, and non- fermentable fiber is found in whole grains and vegetables. The DRI classification considers total fiber intake to be composed of dietary fiber (nondigestible carbohydrates and lignins intrinsic to plants that are fermented by colonic bacteria) and functional fiber (nondigestible carbohydrates isolated from plants or manufactured for use as dietary supplements). Although functional fibers may improve constipation and glucose absorption, they do not contain the other benencial phy- tochemicals and nutrients of naturally occurring fiber found in whole foods. Functional fibers have been added to cereals, salad dressings, soups, baked goods, and meal replacements with the aim of increasing Dietary fiber may help reduce intestinal cell dysplasia by diluting toxins, carcinogens, and tumor promoters; decreasing transit time, thereby reducing colonic mucosal exposure; and promoting toxin expulsion in the fecal stream. Dietary fiber that is resistant to colonic 

Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements 395 Breakfast Cereals & Bars 7% Candy & Sugars 9% Higher Fat Milk & Yogurt 4% Added Sugars Average Intake: 266 kcal/day Sugar-Sweetened Beverages 24% Desserts & Sweet Snacks 19% Within Sugar-Sweetened Beverages: Other Sources 1% ..... Soft Drinks 16% Coffee & Tea 11% ................ Sandwiches 7% Other Sources 19% Other Sources 1% Within Desserts & Sweet Snacks: Doughnuts. Sweet Rolls, & Pastries 3% .. ... 5% Cookies & Brownies 6% ice Cream & Frozen Dairy Desserts 5% 2% assesponses Sport Cuciu Dis Cakes & Pies 4% Fig. 60.4 Top sources and average intakes of added sugars: U.S. population age 1 year and older. Estimates based on 2-day dietary intake data, weighted, from What We Eat in America (WWEIA), NHANES, 2013-2016. (From the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025, Chapter 1: Nutrition and Health Across the Lifespan. Fig. 1.10. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020- degradation may also play a role in maintaining and promoting stool bulk and in regulating intraluminal pressure and colonic wall resis- tance, disordered colonic motility, or both. Lack of certain types of dietary fiber is associated with constipation and diverticulosis. All types of dietary fiber slow gastric emptying and promote satiety, and thus may help to regulate appetite. Dietary fiber may decrease the rate of release and absorption of simple sugars and may help regulate blood sugar concentration by lowering postprandial blood glucose lev- els. Dietary fiber has a low glycemic index and may have a beneficial effect on insulin sensitivity. Fiber also binds luminal cholesterol and reduces absorption and enterohepatic circulation of the cholesterol in bile salts (e.g., with the intake of more viscous forms of dietary fiber, such as pectin). Guar gum, oat products, and pectin (i.e., fermentable/ viscous fiber) lower serum cholesterol, whereas nonfermentable/non- viscous fiber (e.g., flax, wheat bran) may reduce serum triglycerides. Fiber such as psyllium, resistant dextrins, and resistant starch may lower both serum LDL cholesterol and triglycerides. Low fiber intake in Western society has been associated with the increasing incidence and prevalence of diabetes, obesity, CV disease, colon cancer, and IBD. There is a dynamic interplay between the colonic bacterial milieu and the diet. The metabolic fate of fiber is influenced primarily by colonic bacteria, which render it susceptible to fermentation, depending on the structure of the fiber (e.g., pectin, oat bran). Common by-products of colonic fermentation include carbon dioxide, methane (in addition to other gases), oligofructose (also known as a prebiotic, a substrate that nourishes beneficial commensal GI microbiota), and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). The common SCFAs produced by fermentation include acetate, butyrate, and propionate. SCFAs influence colonic physiology by stimulating colonic blood flow and fluid and electrolyte uptake. Butyrate is the preferred fuel for the colonocyte and may have a role in maintaining the normal phenotype in these cells. Good sources of fiber include beans, peas, leafy and cruciferous vegetables, fruits, and whole grains. The observed benefits of diets rich in fruits and vegetables may be mediated by the fiber they contain and also by the other compounds and micronutrients (e.g., polyphenols, carotenoids) they contain. Data are insufficient to establish an EAR for dietary fiber. Al for dietary fiber has been established based on the intake levels associ- ated with reducing risk for CV disease and in lowering or normalizing serum cholesterol (see Table 60.3). Several recommendations address dietary fiber intake in children based on body weight or as a propor- tion of daily calories consumed. The IOM recommends an AI for fiber of 14 g per 1,000 kcal of energy consumed (see Table 60.3), which for younger children may be unrealistic to achieve. The equation for the range of recommended daily fiber intake in grams = Age (years) + 5 to 10 grams per day. The recommendations do not specify type of fiber and predate the newer definitions of fiber. A UL has not been established for fiber, which is not thought to be harmful to human health. Some types of fiber, such as fermentable oli- gosaccharides, may exert symptoms on the basis of their digestibility, by-product formation, and interactions with GI microbiota. Excessive intake of fermentable oligosaccharides (e.g., fructooligosaccharides such as onions), disaccharides (e.g., lactose), monosaccharides (e.g., fructose), and polyols (e.g., sorbitol) (aka FODMAPs) is associated with increased risk for GI symptoms along the functional abdominal pain, functional GI disorders (IBS), and IBD. Restricted intake or substitution with lower-FODMAP foods may be beneficial. Substi- tutions within the same food groups can shift from a high-FODMAP diet to a low-FODMAP diet, which may provide GI symptom relief. For example, substituting cucumber for celery would be exchanging a high-FODMAP food for a low-FODMAP food. Dietary management for some conditions may put certain children at risk of low fiber intake. Gluten-free diets used for celiac disease are often low in fiber. In such cases, gluten-free sources of fiber should be recommended, such as tapioca, flax, corn, rice, sorghum, and quinoa. 

396 Part V • Nutrition MICRONUTRIENTS See Chapters 66-72. Vitamins and minerals, the dietary micronutrients, are essential for sodium. Dietary recommendations for micronutrients were originally established to prevent deficiency and currently also include the impact of micronutrients on long-term health outcomes (Table 60.5). Food fortification is an effective strategy to prevent some nutrient deficien- cies and has been successfully implemented to prevent iodine, folate, The DRI for 0-6 months for all micronutrients are Als, because data are considered to be insufficient to establish an EAR on which an RDA would be based. The Al for the first 6 months of postnatal life is based on the daily mean nutrient intake supplied by human milk for healthy, full-term infants who are exclusively breastfed. For approximately the first 6 months of postnatal life for healthy term infants, an adequately nourished mother produces human milk with adequate amounts of the majority of micronutrients; exceptions are iron and zinc, concen- trations of which are unrelated to maternal intake. In the early post- natal months, infants rely on body stores and iron available from the relatively high erythron (especially with delayed cord clamping), and thus the actual dietary requirement for iron is very modest. Infants born prematurely and/or with evidence of fetal growth restriction are likely to have low iron stores at birth and thus may need exogenous iron earlier than 6 months. Zinc concentrations in human milk decline sharply over the first 3-4 months of lactation and are insufficient to meet needs by approximately 6 months. Thus after about 6 months, sources of both iron and zinc are required from complementary foods, such as pureed meats, fortified foods (e.g., infant cereals), or from supplements. Iron requirements are relatively higher during infancy and early child- hood than later in life and are higher for menstruating females than for males of similar age-groups (see Chapter 72). Iron from animal protein is more bioavailable than that found in animal-source foods such as milk or plant sources because it is already incorporated into heme moi- eties in blood and muscle. Iron deficiency is the most common micro- nutrient deficiency in the world and is associated with iron-deficiency anemia and neurocognitive deficits in some children. Zinc Zinc deficiency is estimated to affect millions of children in low- resource settings and is associated with increased risk for impaired lin- ear growth (stunting), impaired immune function, and increased risk for respiratory and diarrheal diseases. In high-resource settings, mild deficiency may occur in older infants and toddlers if dietary choices do not include meat or fortified products. Whole grains, legumes, and other high-protein plant sources contain good amounts of zinc, but the absorption bioavailability will be lower compared to animal-source Vitamin D Vitamin D insufficiency is more common than previously thought in infants and children. Vitamin D is central to calcium and bone metabolism but is also an important determinant of various nonos- seous health outcomes (see Chapter 69). Children of all ages with darker skin and those who do not consume fortified dairy products should be considered for screening for vitamin D deficiency. The DRI for vitamin D is based on its effects on calcium status and bone health. The goal is to achieve serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels >50 nmol/L (30 ng/dL). Breast milk is a poor source of vitamin D. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends total vitamin D intake of 400 IU/day for infants (0 to <12 months). A supplement is recommended for all breastfed infants to ensure sufficient intake. The RDA of vitamin D is currently 600 units daily for healthy children 1-18 years of age. Calcium is key to bone health. Adequacy is determined in part by bone mineral content and bone mineral density (BMD). The main stor- age organs for calcium are the bones and teeth. Bone mineral accre- tion occurs primarily during childhood, with peak bone mass being achieved by the second to third decade of life. Calcium recommen- dations include a change from an Al to RDA, in terms of strength of evidence for recommendations, and increased UL in 9- to 18-year-olds (Table 60.6). There are no adequate biomarkers to assess calcium status in healthy children because serum calcium is tightly regulated (regard- less of intake and total body calcium) by changes in parathyroid hor- mone and calcitriol levels. Maintaining adequate serum calcium level despite inadequate intake could come at the expense of BMD. Therefore in the long term, reduced BMD could serve as a surrogate marker of chronic calcium intake and status. It is important to note other deter- minants of BMD are age, gender, genetic-ethnic factors, hormonal sta- tus, physical activity, and weight. Assessments of calcium status should include calcium intake in the diet. It is also important to educate fami- lies on additional and alternative sources of calcium (including calcium supplementation) if calcium intake is determined to be low. Electrolytes Potassium (K+) and sodium (Na*) are the main intracellular and extra- cellular cations, respectively, and are involved in transport of fluids and nutrients across the cellular membrane. The Al for potassium is related to its effects in maintaining a healthy blood pressure, reducing risk for nephrolithiasis, and supporting bone health. Moderate potassium defi- ciency occurs even in the absence of hypokalemia and can result in increased blood pressure, stroke, and other CV disease. For people at increased risk of hypertension and who are salt sen- sitive, reducing sodium intake and increasing potassium intake is advised. Leafy green vegetables, vine fruits (e.g., tomatoes, eggplant, zucchini, pumpkin), and root vegetables (e.g., yams, beets) are good sources of potassium (see Table 60.6). People with impaired renal func- tion may need to reduce potassium intake, because hyperkalemia can increase the risk for fatal cardiac arrhythmias among these patients. Most dietary sodium (i.e., sodium chloride, or table salt) in the United States is found in processed foods, breads, and condiments (Fig. 60.5). Sodium salt (NaCl) is added to foods to serve as a preservative and enhance palatability. Sodium has an Al, but given the risk of table salt-related hypertension, an UL has also been set. The UL threshold may be even lower in certain populations, who on average may be more sodium salt sensitive, and for those with hypertension or preexisting renal disease. Dietary sodium intake also displaces potassium intake. Elevated sodium:potassium ratios can increase the risk for nephrolithi- asis. Intakes of <2,300 mg sodium (approximately 1 tsp of table salt) per day are recommended. The average daily salt intake for most people in the United States and Canada exceeds both the Al and UL. For popula- tions with or at risk of hypertension and renal disease, sodium intake should be decreased to <1,500 mg/day and potassium intake increased to >4,700 mg/day. For persons with hypertension, additional dietary guidelines are available from the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hyper- tension (DASH) eating plan. The daily water requirement and water content as a proportion of body weight are highest in infants and decrease with age. Water intake is achieved with liquid and food intake, and losses include excretion in the urine and stool, as well as insensible and evaporative losses through the skin and respiratory tract. An Al has been established for water (see Table 60.6). Special considerations are required by life stages and by BMR, physical activity, body proportions (surface area to volume), environment, and underlying medical conditions. Breast milk and infant formula provide adequate water, and additional water or other fluid intake is not required until complementary foods are introduced. Water contains no calories, but the concern is that additional water intake in young infants will decrease breast milk intake and displace the intake of essential nutrients during this phase of rapid rate of growth and high metabolic activity. The relatively higher fluid needs of 

10, 2024a erases my at University of Southern without permission. Eisticine. 8 Table 60.5 NUTRIENT Biotin (vitamin B7) Choline Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamins LIFE STAGE FUNCTION GROUP RDA OR Al Coenzyme in Infants (ug/day) 0-6 mo fat theogen, 1-52m 5* 6* and amino acids Children (ug/day) 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 8* 12* Males (ug/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 20* 25* 30* Females (ug/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr Pregnancy (ug/day) ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 20* 25* 30* 30* 30* Lactation (ug/day) ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 35* 35* Precursor for Infants (mg/day) acetylcholine, 0-6 mo phospholipids, 7-12 mo 125* 150* and betaine Children (mg/day) 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 200* 250* Males (mg/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 375* 550* 550* Females (mg/day) 9-13 yr 375* 14-18 yr 400* 19-21 yr 425* Pregnancy (mg/day) ≤18 yr 450* 19-21 yr 450* Lactation (mg/day) ≤18 yr 550* 19-21 yr 550* UL ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND 2,000 3,000 3,500 2,000 3,500 3,000 3,500 3,000 3,500 SELECTED FOOD SOURCES Liver, smaller amounts in fruits and meats Milk, liver, eggs, peanuts EXCESERE CONSUME TION Limited data to support adverse effects with excess; however, high intakes still should be taken with precaution. Fishy body odor, sweating, salivation, hypotension, hepatotoxicity SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS None Patients with trimethylaminuria, renal disease, liver disease, depression, and Parkinson disease may be at risk for adverse effects with intakes at the UL. Als have been set for choline, but there are little data to assess whether a dietary supply of choline is needed at all stages of the life cycle because the choline requirement might be met by endogenous synthesis at some of these stages. Continued Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements 397 

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright cy com by ier on Table 60.5 NUTRIENT Folate (folic acid, vitamin B9, folacin); pteroyl- polyglutamates given as dietary folate equivalents (DFEs) 1 DFE = 1 ug food folate = 0.6 mg folate from fortified food, or as supplement consumed with food = 0.5 ug of supplement taken on empty stomach Niacin (vitamin B3) Includes nicotinic acid amide, nicotinic acid (pyridine-3 carboxylic acid), and derivatives that exhibit biologic activity of nicotinamide Given as niacin equivalents (NE) 1 mg niacin = 60 mg tryptophan Age 0-6 mo: preformed niacin (not NE). Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamins-cont'd LIFE STAGE FUNCTION Coenzyme in metabolism of nucleic and amino acids Prevents megaloblastic anemia GROUP RDA OR AI Infants (ug/day) 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 65* 80* Children (ug/day) 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 150 200 Males (ug/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 300 400 400 Females (ug/day) 9-13 yr 300 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 400 400 Pregnancy (ug/day) ≤18 yr 600 19-21 yr 600 Lactation (ug/day) ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 500 500 Coenzyme or cosubstrate in many biologic reduction and oxidation reactions, thus required for energy metabolism Infants (mg/day) 0-6 mo 7-12 mo Children (mg/day) 1-3 yr 4-8 yr Males (mg/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 уг 16 16 Females (mg/day) 9-13 yr 12 14-18 yr 14 19-21 yr 14 Pregnancy (mg/day) ≤18 yr 18 19-21 yr 18 Lactation (mg/day) ≤18 yr 17 19-21 yr UL ND ND 300 400 600 800 1,000 600 800 1,000 800 1,000 800 1,000 ND ND 10 15 20 20 30 35 30 30 35 SELECTED FOOD SOURCES Enriched cereal, grains, dark leafy vegetables, enriched and whole-grain breads and bread products, fortified ready-to-eat cereals Meat, fish, poultry, enriched and whole-grain breads and bread products, fortified ready-to-eat cereals ADVERSE EFFECTS OF EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION Masks neurologic complications in people with vitamin B12 deficiency. No adverse effects with folate from tood or supplements have been reported; however, high intakes still should be taken with u applies to synthetic forms obtained from supplements and/ or fortified foods. No evidence of adverse effects from consuming naturally occurring niacin in food. Adverse effects from niacin- containing supplements can include flushing and Gl distress. UL for niacin applies to synthetic forms obtained from supplements, fortified food, or a combination of these. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Poor intake associated with neural tube defects; therefore all women who can become pregnant should consume, in addition to intake of food folate from a varied diet, 400 g/day from supplements or fortified foods. Extra niacin may be required by persons treated with hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis or those with malabsorption syndrome. 398 Part V • Nutrition 

10, 2024a med ahm Cerises my as Universiy of Souhern E without permission. Eisticine. serVeyier on Table 60.5 NUTRIENT Pantochenicacid Riboflavin (vitamin B2) Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamins-cont'd LIFE STAGE FUNCTION Coenzyme in fatty acid metabolism GROUP RDA OR AI Infants (mg/day) 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 1.7* 1.8* Children (mg/day) 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 3* Males (mg/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 5* 5* Females (mg/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 4* 19-21 yr Pregnancy (mg/day) ≤18 yr 6* 19-21 yr 6* Lactation (mg/day) ≤18 yr 7* 19-21 yr 7* Coenzyme in numerous redox reactions Infants (mg/day) 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 0.3* 0.4* Children (mg/day) 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 0.5 0.6 Males (mg/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 0.9 1.3 1.3 Females (mg/day) 9-13 yr 0.9 14-18 yr 1.0 19-21 yr 1.1 Pregnancy (mg/day) ≤18 yr 1.4 19-21 yr 1.4 Lactation (mg/day) ≤18 yr 1.6 19-21 yr 1.6 UL ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND SELECTED FOOD SOURCES Chicken, beef, potatoes, oats, cereals, tomato prodey, y, list, egg yolk, broccoli, whole grains Organ meats, milk, bread products, fortified cereals ADVERSE EFFECTS OF EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION Doses greater than 10 mg/day may cause mild diarrhea or mild intestinal distress; therefore high intakes should be taken with precaution. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Doses are age-dependent and if the patient is pregnant or lactating. No adverse effects associated with vitamin B2 consumption from food or supplements have been reported; however, high intakes still should be taken with precaution. None Continued Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements 399 

Down prid for mohamed 2024. ms2020 only. @gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Table 60.5 NUTRIENT Thiamin (vitamin B,,) Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamins-cont'd LIFE STAGE FUNCTION GROUP RDA OR AI Infants (mg/day) 0.2* 0.3* Children (mg/day) 0.5 0.6 Vitamin A Includes provitamin A carotenoids that are dietary precursors of retinol Given as retinol activity equivalents (RAEs) 1 RAE = 1 mg retinol, 12 ug B-carotene, 24 g a-carotene, or 24 ug B-cryptoxanthin To calculate RAEs from REs of provitamin A carotenoids in food, divide REs by 2 For preformed vitamin A in food or supplements and for provitamin A carotenoids in supplements, 1 RE = 1 RAE Required for normal vision, gene expression, reproduction, embryonic development, and immune function Males (mg/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 0.9 1.2 1.2 Females (mg/day) 9-13 yr 0.9 14-18 yr 1.0 19-21 yr 1.1 Pregnancy (mg/day) ≤18 yr 1.4 19-21 yr 1.4 Lactation (mg/day) ≤18 yr 1.4 19-21 yr 1.4 Infants (ug/day) 0-6 mo 400* 7-12 mol 500* Children (ug/day) 1-3 yr 300 4-8 yr 400 Males (ug/day) 9-13 yr 600 14-18 yr 900 19-21 уг 900 Females (ug/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 r Pregnancy (ug/day) ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 600 700 700 750 770 Lactation (ug/day) ≤18 yr 1,200 19-21 yr 1,300 UL ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND 600 600 600 900 2.300 3,000 2,700 3,000 2,800 3,000 2,800 3,000 SELECTED FOOD SOURCES Enriched, fortified, or whole-grain products, bread and bread products, mixed main ingredient is grain, ready-to-eat cereals ADVERSE EFFECTS OF EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION No adverse effects associated with vitamin B, consumption from food or supplements have been reported; however, high intakes still should be taken with precaution. Liver, dairy products, Teratologic effects, liver toxicity fish, dark-colored (from preformed vitamin A only). fruit, leafy vegetables SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Persons being treated with hemodialysis or have a malabsorption syndrome may have increased needs for vitamin B1. Persons with high alcohol intake, preexisting liver disease, hyperlipidemia, or severe protein malnutrition may be susceptible to the adverse effects of excess preformed vitamin A intake. B-Carotene supplements are advised only to serve as a provitamin A source for persons at risk for vitamin A deficiency. 400 Part V • Nutrition 

pril 2 2024. med ahn ned (dr.i onal without permission. 212024.1 Ers cline. serVeyier on Table 60.5 Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamins-cont'd LIFE STAGE NUTRIENT Comprie a group ot six related compounds: pyridoxal, pyridoxine, pyridoxamine, and 5-phosphates (PLP, PNP, PMP) FUNCTION Coenzyme in metabolism of amino acids, glycogen, and sphingoid bases GROUP RDA OR AI Infants (mg/day) 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 0.1* 0.3* Children (mg/day) 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 0.5 0.6 Males (mg/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 уг 19-21 yr 1.0 1.3 1.3 Females (mg/day) 9-13 yr 1.0 14-18 уг 1.2 19-21 yr 1.3 Pregnancy (mg/day) ≤18 yr 1.9 19-21 yr 1.9 Lactation (mg/day) ≤18 yr 2.0 19-21 yr 2.0 Cobalamin (vitamin B12) Coenzyme in nucleic acid metabolism Prevents megaloblastic anemia Infants (g/day) 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 0.4* 0.5* Children (ug/day) 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 0.9 1.2 Males (ug/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 1.8 2.4 2.4 Females (ug/day) 9-13 yr 1.8 14-18 yr 2.4 19-21 yr 2.4 Pregnancy (ug/day) ≤18 yr 2.6 19-21 yr 2.6 Lactation (ug/day) ≤18 yr 2.8 19-21 уг 2.8 UL ND ND 30 60 80 100 60 80 100 80 100 80 100 ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND SELECTED FOOD SOURCES Fortified cereals, organ meats, fortified soy-based meat substitutes EXCESERE CONSUME TION No adverse effects associated with vitamin B from food have been reported; however, high intakes still should be taken with precaution. Sensory neuropathy, ataxia, and nausea have occurred from high intakes (>1,000 mg/day) of supplemental forms. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Deficiencies often occur when other B vitamins in the body are low, particularly vitamin B12 and folic acid. Risk of developing deficiency is associated with conditions such as kidney disease, celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and alcohol use. Fortified cereals, meat, fish, poultry Because 10-30% of older people malabsorb food-bound vitamin B12, those >50 yr are advised to meet their RDA mainly by consuming foods fortified with vitamin B12 or a supplement containing vitamin B12- Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements 401 Continued 

Downloaded : April mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalK ey.com by Elsevier on 2024. onal only. other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Table 60.5 NUTRIENT Vitamin C (ascorbic acid, dehydroascorbic acid) Vitamin E (a-tocopherol) a-tocopherol includes RRR-a-tocopherol, the only form of a- tocopherol that occurs naturally in foods, and the 2R-stereoisomeric forms of a-tocopherol (RRR-, RSR-, RRS-, and RSS-a-tocopherol) that occur in fortified foods and supplements It does not include the 25-stereoisomeric forms of a-tocopherol (SRR-, SSR-, SRS-, and SSS-a- supplements Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamins-cont'd LIFE STAGE FUNCTION GROUP RDA OR AI Cofactor for Infants (mg/day) reactions 0-6 mo 40* requiring 7-12 mo 50* copper or iron Children (mg/day) metalloenzyme 1-3 yr and as a 4-8 yr protective 25 Males (mg/day) antioxidant 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 45 75 90 Females (mg/day) 9-13 yr 45 14-18 yr 65 19-21 yr 75 Pregnancy (mg/day) ≤18 yr 80 19-21 yr Lactation (mg/day) ≤18 yr 115 19-21 yr 120 A metabolic function has not yet been identified. Vitamin E's major function appears to be as a nonspecific chain- breaking antioxidant. Infants (mg/day) 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 4* 5* Children (mg/day) 1-3 yr 4-8 yr Males (mg/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr = 15 15 Females (mg/day) 9-13 yr 11 14-18 yr 15 19-21 yr Pregnancy (mg/day) ≤18 yr 15 19-21 yr 15 Lactation (mg/day) ≤18 yr 19 19-21 yr UL ND ND 400 650 1,200 1,800 2,000 1,200 1,800 2,000 1,800 2,000 1,800 2,000 ND ND 200 300 600 800 1,000 600 800 1,000 800 1,000 800 1,000 SELECTED FOOD SOURCES Citrus fruit, tomatoes, tomato juices potatoes, Cruitower, strawberries, cabbage, spinach Vegetable oil, unprocessed cereal grains, nuts, fruit, vegetables, meat ADVERSE EFFECTS OF EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION Gi dission as orphey stones, No evidence of adverse effects from consuming vitamin E naturally occurring in food. Adverse effects from supplements may include hemorrhagic toxicity. UL applies to any form of a- tocopherol obtained from supplements, fortified foods, or a combination of these. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Smokers require additional 35 mg/day of vitamin C over that needed by nonsmokers. Nonsmokers regularly exposed to tobacco smoke should ensure they meet the RDA for vitamin C. Persons receiving anticoagulant therapy are at risk of excess bleeding when taking vitamin E supplements in doses greater than 1,000 mg/ day. 402 Part V • Nutrition 

Down prid 2024a med ahmed (dr.m. ms 20200 @gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalK ey.com by Elsevier on other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Table 60.5 Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamins-cont' d LIFE STAGE NUTRIENT Vitamin K FUNCTION GROUP RDA OR AI UL Coenzyme Infants (ug/day) during synthesis of 0-6 mo SELECTED FOOD SOURCES Green vegetables (collards, many proteins 7-12 mo Children 2.0* 2.5* ND ND involved in blood clotting (ug/day) EXCESERE CONSUME TION No adverse effects associated with vitamin K consumption from food or supplements have been reported in humans or animals; however, high intakes still should be taken with precaution. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Patients receiving anticoagulant therapy or taking long-term antibiotics should monitor vitamin K intake. and bone 1-3 yr 30* 55* ND ND cabbage, plant oil, metabolism 4-8 yr Males (ng/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 60* 75* 120* ND ND ND Females (ug/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr ND ND ND Pregnancy (ug/day) ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 75* 90* ND ND Lactation (ug/day) ≤18 yr 75* ND 19-21 yr 90* ND Note: Starred (*) numbers are adequate intake (Al) and bold numbers are RDA. RDAs and Als may both be used as goals for individual intake. RDAs are set to meet the needs of 97-98% of members in a group. For healthy breastfed infants, the Al is the mean intake. The Al for other life stage and gender groups is believed to cover the needs of all members of the group, but lack of data prevents specifying with confidence the percentage covered by this intake. UL is the maximum level of daily nutrient intake that is likely to pose no risk of adverse effects. Unless otherwise specified, the UL represents total intake from food, water, and supplements. Because of a lack of suitable data, ULs could not be established for potassium, water, or inorganic sulfate. In the absence of ULs, extra caution may be warranted in consuming levels above recommended intakes. ND amounts are not determinable because of a lack of data on adverse effects in this age group and concern with regard to lack of ability to handle excess amounts. Source of intake should be from food only to prevent high levels of intake. *RDA for vitamin D in IU/day: 400 if < 1 yr age, 600 if >1 yr, lactating, or pregnant. Al, Adequate intake; Gl, gastrointestinal; ND, not determinable; PLP, pyridoxal phosphate; PMP, pyridoxamine phosphate; PNP, pyridoxine phosphate; RDA, recommended dietary allowance; UL, upper limit of normal. Data from Dietary reference intakes for calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, vitamin D, and fluoride, 1997; Dietary reference intakes for thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, vitamin B6, folate, vitamin B12, Pantothenic acid, biotin, and choline, 1998; Dietary reference intakes for vitamin C, vitamin E, selenium, and carotenoids, 2000; Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, vitamin K, arsenic, boron, chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and zinc, 2001; Dietary reference intakes for energy, carbohydrate, fiber, fat, fatty acids, cholesterol, protein, and amino acids, 2002/2005; Dietary reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D, 2011. These reports may be accessed via www.nap.edu Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements 403 

2024. personal ahmed is my. 20 University uses without permission. or Copyrigh 120241 Eisticine. by levier on Table 60.6 NUTRIENT Sodium Chloride Potassium Dietary Reference Intakes for Select Micronutrients and Water FUNCTION LIFE STAGE GROUP Al (mg/day) UL (mg/day) Maintains fluid volume outside of cells and thus normal cell function Infants 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 120 370 ND ND Children 1-3 yr 4-8 уг 1,000 1,200 1,500 1,900 Males 9-13 yr 14-21 yr 1,500 1,500 2,200 2,300 Females 9-13 yr 1,500 13-21 yr 1,500 Pregnancy and Lactation ≥14 yr 1,500 2,200 2,300 2,300 With sodium, maintains fluid volume outside of cells and thus normal cell function Infants 0-6 mo 7-12 mo Children 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 180 570 1,500 1,900 ND ND 2,300 2,900 Males 9-13 yr 2,300 14-21 yr 2,300 Females 9-13 yr 2,300 13-21 yr 2,300 Pregnancy and Lactation ≥14 yr 2,300 3,400 3,600 3,400 3,600 3,600 Maintains fluid volume Infants inside/outside of 0-6 mo cells and thus normal 7-12 mo 400 700 None set cell function; acts to blunt the rise of Children blood pressure in 1-3 yr response to excess 4-8 yr 3,000 3,800 No UL sodium intake and Males decrease markers of 9-13 yr bone turnover and 14-21 yr 4,500 4,700 recurrence of kidney Females stones 9-13 yr 13-21 yr Pregnancy ≥14 yr 4,500 4,700 4,700 Lactation ≥14 yr 5,100 SELECTED FOOD SOURCES Processed foods with added sodium chloride (salt), benzoate, phosphate; salted meats, bread, nuts, cold cuts; margarine; butter; salt added to foods in cooking or at the table. Salt is about 40% sodium by weight. Processed foods with added table salt, benzoate, phosphate; salted meats, nuts, cold cuts; margarine; butter; salt added to foods in cooking or at the table. Salt is about 60% chloride by weight. Fruits and vegetables, dried peas, dairy products, meats, nuts ADVERSE EFFECTS OF SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION Hypertension, increased risk of Al is set based on ability to obtain a cardiovascular disease and nutritionally adequate diet for other stroke nutrients and to meet the needs for sweat losses for persons engaged in recommended levels of physical activity. Persons engaged in activity at higher levels or in humid climates resulting in excessive sweating might need more than the Al. UL applies to apparently healthy persons without hypertension; it thus may be too high for persons who already have hypertension. In concert with sodium, results in hypertension Chloride is lost, usually with sodium, in sweat and in vomiting and diarrhea. Al and UL are equimolar in amount to sodium because most of sodium in diet comes as table salt. None documented from food Persons taking drugs for cardiovascular alone, but potassium from disease such as ACE inhibitors, supplements or salt ARBs, or potassium-sparing diuretics substitutes can result in should be careful not to consume hyperkalemia and possibly supplements containing potassium sudden death if excess is and might need to consume less than consumed by persons with the Al. chronic renal insufficiency (kidney disease) or diabetes 404 Part V • Nutrition 

Downloaded : A pril ma For debond ds oy o@er is com a premis of Copyright 2024 froche Kir go selier on N only. Else vier Inc. Table 60.6 NUTRIENT Dietary Reference Intakes for Select Micronutrients and Water—cont'd FUNCTION LIFE STAGE Al UL SELECTED FOOD ADVERSE EFFECTS OF SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS GROUP (mg/day) (mg/day) SOURCES EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION Vitamin D (calciferol) Maintains serum 1 us alinol = 40 calcium and DRI values are phosphorus concentrations based on absence of adequate supisure to Infants (ug/day)* Fish liver oils, flesh of fatty 0-6 mo 10 7-12 mo 10 25 fren, livet haus from Elevated pation casSOHD Patients receiving glucocorticoid therapy might require additional vitamin D. hypercalcemia Children (ug/day)* fed products, fortied 1-3 уг 15 4-8 yr 15 Males (ug/day)* 9-21 yr 15 Females (ug/day)* 9-21 yr 15 Pregnancy (ug/day)* ≤18 yr 15 Lactation (ug/day) ≤18 yr 15 19-21 yr 63 75 100 100 100 100 100 Calcium Essential role in blood Infants clotting, muscle 0-6 mo contraction, nerve transmission, and 7-12 mo 200 260 Milk, cheese, yogurt, corn Kidney stones, hypercalcemia, Amenorrheic women (exercise or tortillas, calcium-set milk alkali syndrome, renal anorexia nervosa induced) have tofu, Chinese cabbage, insufficiency reduced net calcium absorption. kale, broccoli bone and tooth Children formation 1-3 yr 4-8 yr Males 9-18 yr 19-21 yr Females 9-18 yr 700 1,000 1.300 1,300 2,500 2,500 3,000 2,500 3,000 19-21 yr Pregnancy ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 1,300 1,000 Lactation ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 1,300 1,000 3,000 2,500 3,000 2,500 Continued Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements 405 

for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms20200 2024. onal only. eric mat penis of Copyrica 2024 seCreatom l sevier on Table 60.6 Dietary Reference Intakes for Select Micronutrients and Water-cont'd NUTRIENT FUNCTION LIFE STAGE GROUP (mg/day) (mg/day) SOURCES SELECTED FOOD Iron Critical component of enzymes, oction and Infants 0-6 mo 0.27 7-12 mo 40 40 Children 1-3 yr 4-8 yr 40 40 Seeds legs, bread, Males 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr Females 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 00 = 00 8 15 18 40 45 45 40 45 45 Pregnancy ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 27 45 45 Lactation ≤18 gr 19-21 yr 10 9 45 Zinc Egrowial for proper development; important catalyst for 100 specific enzymes Infants 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 2 3 Children 1-3 yr 4-8 yr Males 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 8 = 11 23 34 40 Females 9-13 yr 14-18 yr 19-21 yr 23 34 40 Pregnancy ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 12 11 34 40 Lactation ≤18 yr 19-21 yr 13 12 34 40 ADVERSE EFFECTS OF EXCESSIVE CONSUMPTION GI distress SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS Persons with decreased gastric acidity may be at increased risk for deficiency. Cow's milk is a poor source of bioavailable iron and is not recommended for children <1 yr old. Neurocognitive deficits have been reported in infants with iron deficiency. RDA for females increases with menarche related to increased losses during menstruation. Vegans and vegetarians might require iron supplementation or intake of iron-fortified foods. Gl parasites can increase iron losses via GI bleeds. Iron supplements can interfere with zinc absorption, and vice versa; if supplements are being used, the doses should be staggered. Meats, shellfish, legumes, Acutely, zinc supplements fortified cereals, whole cause Gl irritation and grains headache; chronic effects of zine supplementation include impaired immune function, changes in lipoprotein and cholesterol levels, and reduced copper status. Zinc supplements interfere with iron absorption, and vice versa; therefore if supplements are being used, the doses should be staggered Zinc deficiency can be associated with stunting or impaired linear growth. 406 Part V • Nutrition 

20, 2024a med ahm my. 20 gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Table 60.6 Dietary Reference Intakes for Select Micronutrients and Water-cont'd Water Maintains homeostasis Infants in the body (L/day) Allows transport 0-6 mo of nutrients to 7-12 mo 0.7 0.8 None set cells and removal and excretion of Children All beverages, including water Moisture in foods High-moisture foods include watermelon, meats, and soups waste products of 1-3 yr metabolism 4-8 yr 1.3 1.7 Males (L/day) 9-13 yr 14-18 yr ≥19 уг 2.4 3.3 3.7 Females (L/day) 9-13 yr No UL because normally Recommended intakes for water are functioning kidneys can based on median intakes of generally handle >0.7 L (24 oz) of fluid healthy persons who are adequately per hour. hydrated. Symptoms of water intoxication Persons can be adequately hydrated include hyponatremia, which at levels above or below the Als can result in heart failure, provided; Als provided are for total and rhabdomyolysis (skeletal water in temperate climates. muscle tissue injury), which All sources can contribute to total water can lead to kidney failure. needs: beverages (tea, coffee, juice, soda, drinking water) and moisture found in foods. Moisture in food accounts for about 20% of total water intake. Thirst and consumption of beverages at meals are adequate to maintain hydration. 14-18 yr ≥19 yr 2.1 2.3 2.71 Pregnancy (L/day) ≥14 yr 3.0 Lactation (L/day) ≥14 yr 3.8 Note: Bold numbers are RDA. RDAs and Als may both be used as goals for individual intake. RDAs are set to meet the needs of 97-98% of members in a group. For healthy breastfed infants, the Al is the mean intake. The Al for other life stage and gender groups is believed to cover the needs of all members of a group, but lack of data prevents specifying with confidence the percentage covered by this intake. UL is the maximum level of daily nutrient intake that is likely to pose no risk of adverse effects. Unless otherwise specified, the UL represents total intake from food, water, and supplements. Because of a lack of suitable data, ULs could not be established for potassium, water, or inorganic sulfate. In the absence of ULs, extra caution may be warranted in consuming levels above recommended intakes. ND amounts are not determinable because of a lack of data on adverse effects in this age-group and concern with regard to lack of ability to handle excess amounts. Source of intake should be from food only to prevent high levels of intake. *Vitamin D RDA in IU/day: 400 if <1 yr, 600 if >1 yr of age or pregnant or lactating. ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; Al, adequate intake; ARB, angiotensin receptor blocker; Gl, gastrointestinal; ND, not determinable; RDA, recommended dietary allowance; UL, upper limit of normal. Data from Food and Nutrition Board, U.S. Institute of Medicine. Dietary Reference Intakes for Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and Sulfate (http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=10925); and Ross AC, U.S. Institute of Medicine, Committee to Review Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin D and Calcium. Dietary Reference Intakes: Calcium, Vitamin D. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011: pp. xv, 536 Chapter 60 • Nutritional Requirements 407 

408 Part V • Nutrition Poultry, Excluding Deli & Yeast Breads & Tortillas 3% Deli & Cured Products 3% Starchy Weantnbes 4% 5% Pizza 5% Chips, Crackers & savory snacks 4% Eggs 3% Sodium Average Intake: 3,393 mg/day Breakfast Cereals & Bars 3% Sandwiches 21% Rice, Pasta & Other Grain-Based Mixed Dishes 8% Within Sandwiches: Hotdog Sandwiches Breakfast Sandwiches 2% Soups 4% Vegetables, Excluding Starchy 7% Desserts & Sweet Snacks 4% 2% Meat, Poultry & Seafood Mixed Dishes 5% Within Rice, Pasta & Other Grain-Based Mixed Dishes: Other Sources 3% ** Other Sources ... 19% Mexican Dishes, Excludes Tacos & Burritos Other Sandwiches 7% Chicken & Turkey Sandwiches 4% ......: Condiments & Gravies 3% 3% 1% Other Sources 3% Rice Mixed Dishes Pasta Mixed Dishes, Excludes Macaroni & Cheese Sandunchec Burritos & Fig. 60.5 Top sources and average intakes of sodium: U.S. population age 1 and older. Estimates based on 2-day dietary intake data, weighted, from What We Eat in America (WWEIA), National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 2013-2016. (From Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 2020-2025, Chapter 1: Nutrition and Health Across the Lifespan. Fig 1.12. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2020- 12/Dietary_Guidelines_for_Americans_2020-2025.pdf.) Table 60.7 Growth Chart Comparisons for Measuring Growth from Birth to 20 Years GROWTH CHART AGE RANGE GROWTH METRICS World Health Organization, 2006 INSUFFICIENT EXCESSIVE GROWTH GROWTH PERCENTILE PERCENTILE <2.3rd >97.7th Birth to 2 yr Weight, length, weight- for-length, and head circumference U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2000 2-20 уг Weight, height, body mass index (BMI) <5th >95th infants and young children can be explained in part by the high ratio of body surface area to volume in infancy, high respiratory rate, and rapid growth. The consequences of inadequate fluid intake include impaired ther- moregulation and heat dissipation, reduced activity tolerance and per- formance, and reduced intravascular fluid and dehydration. Inadequate fluid intake may be reflected by decreased urine output. These defi- cits can result in an increased compensatory heart rate, hypotension, and syncope, and if uncorrected, renal injury or nephrolithiasis. "Free water" is defined as water in the body that can be removed by ultra- filtration and in which substances can be dissolved. Excess free water intake is usually better tolerated by healthy adults than by younger chil- dren, who are at increased risk for water intoxication. Hyponatremia can result when water and sodium are out of balance, such as excess free water intake coupled with inadequate sodium intake. Fluid intake requirements and restrictions are also influenced by any underlying renal and hormonal disorders, including diabetes, the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), and diabetes BMI STATUS PERCENTILE Under (<5th) Normal (5-85th) Over (85-95th) Obese (>95th) Severe obesity (≥120% of 95th or ≥35 kg/m}) MEASURING NUTRITIONAL ADEQUACY The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and AAP recommend the use of the WHO charts to monitor growth of all infants and children (human milk-fed and infant formula-fed) from birth to 2 years, and the use of the CDC 2000 growth charts for children 2-20 years (see Chapters 19 and 27). The WHO growth charts are derived from longitudinal and cross-sectional data obtained from a sample of healthy breastfed infants and children (0-2 years) who were receiving adequate nutritional intake and medical care in Brazil, Ghana, India, Norway, Oman, and the United States. Consequently, the WHO/CDC 0-2 year growth charts are considered standards and describe the ideal growth of adequately nourished healthy children under best-care prac- tices. The CDC 2-20 year charts are considered references and describe the population's average growth and distribution. In the clinical setting, the 2.3rd and 97.7th percentiles on the WHO growth charts are used to identify insufficient and excessive growth from birth to 2 years, respectively. In contrast, the 5th and 95th percentiles are recommended for the equivalent identification in the CDC growth charts from 2 to 20 years (Table 60.7). Note that length, weight, and 

Chapter 61 • Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents 409 weight-for-length are used in the WHO growth charts from birth to 2 years. Body mass index (BMI) can be calculated but is not recommended for use in children <2 years. Stature, weight, and BMI are used in the CDC 2000 growth charts from 2 to 20 years of age. These charts can be used to categorize children as underweight (<5th BMI percentile), normal weight (5-85th), overweight (85-95th), and obese (≥95th BMI percentile). Severe obesity is defined as BMI ≥120% of the 95th percentile or BMI ≥35 kg/m* (whichever is lower). This assessment corresponds to approximately the 99th percentile or a BMI z score ≥2.33. Severe obe- sity that exceeds the 99th percentile is tracked on a specialized percen- tile curve for obesity. Furthermore, adult classification is used for BMI ≥27 kg/m? in adolescents over age 18 for consideration of medication and bariatric surgery. It is important to consider the limitations in the use of WHO and CDC growth charts for certain populations such as premature infants, children with certain genetic disorders (e.g., Turner syndrome, Down syndrome, Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, achondroplasia) and chil- dren with cerebral palsy. Specific growth charts addressing the unique growth characteristics of these children are available from various resources, including the AAP. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Table 61.1 Selected Beneficial Properties of Human Milk Compared with Infant Formula FACTOR ACTION ANTIBACTERIAL FACTORS Secretory IgA Lactoferrin K-Casein Oligosaccharides Cytokines GROWTH FACTORS Epidermal growth factor Transforming growth factor (TGF) Nerve growth factor ENZYMES Platelet-activating factor (PAF)-acetylhydrolase Glutathione peroxidase Nucleotides Specific antigen targeted antiinfective action Immunomodulation, iron chelation, antimicrobial action, antiadhesive, trophic for intestinal growth Antiadhesive, bacterial flora Prevention of bacterial attachment Antiinflammatory, epithelial barrier function Luminal surveillance, repair of intestine Suppress imple unction (TE-p) Promotes neural growth Blocks action of PAF Prevents lipid oxidation Enhance antibody responses, bacterial flora Adapted from Hamosh M. Bioactive factors in human milk. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2001;48:69-86. Chapter 61 Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents Katherine J. Barrett, Stephanie P. Gilley, Matthew A. Haemer, Nancy F. Krebs, and Susan L. Johnson Early feeding experiences can support the development of healthy eating habits, optimal growth and development, and prevention of chronic disease throughout the lite course. Childhood nutrition is known to play a role in the origin of adult diseases such as type 2 diabe- tes, hypertension, obesity, and metabolic syndrome. To support devel- opment and to prevent chronic disease, appropriate feeding practices are best established in the neonatal period and continued throughout childhood and adolescence to adulthood. Healthful feeding in children requires partnerships between family members, the healthcare system, schools, the community, and policy makers. FEEDING DURING THE FIRST YEAR OF LIFE Breastfeeding The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and World Health Orga- nization (WHO) have declared breastfeeding and the administration of human milk to be the ideal practice for infant feeding and nutrition. Breastfeeding has documented short- and long-term medical and neu- rodevelopmental advantages and rare contraindications (Tables 61.1, 61.2, and 61.3). The AAP and the WHO recommend that infants be exclusively fed human breast milk for approximately 6 months. Breast- feeding ideally should be continued with the introduction of comple- mentary foods until 24 months of age or longer, if mutually desired by the mother and infant. We recognize that there are some lactating indi- viduals who do not identify as women/mothers and may prefer the use of other terms, including the use of chestfeeding in lieu of breastfeed- ing. This is a consideration that a practitioner may need to make when speaking to a family member who uses these alternative terms. The suc- cess of breastfeeding initiation and continuation depends on multiple factors, such as education about breastfeeding, hospital breastfeeding practices and policies, routine and timely follow-up care, family and societal support, and the health of the mother (Tables 61.4 and 61.5). Breastfeeding support from both professionals and lay individuals has a positive impact on breastfeeding success, and the importance of such support cannot be overstated. Feedings are initiated soon after birth unless medical conditions preclude them. Mothers can be encouraged to feed at both breasts at each feeding, starting with the breast offered second at the last feeding. For optimal milk production, it is preferable to fully empty the first breast before moving to the second breast, rather than par- tially emptying both sides. It is not unusual for an infant to fall asleep after the first breast and refuse the second. Table 61.6 summarizes patterns of milk supply in the first week. Pacifiers may help prevent sudden infant death syndrome in breastfed infants, but it is not rec- ommended to introduce until breastfeeding is well established and should not be used to try to increase time between feeds or in lieu of a feed in a baby showing hunger cues. Breastfeeding is a learned skill for both mother and infant, and support from a provider knowledgeable in breastfeeding is critical, especially as milk production is established in the first few weeks post- partum. It is helpful to instruct new mothers about infant hunger cues and correct nipple latch, positioning of the infant on the breast, and feeding frequency. It is also suggested that someone trained in lactation observe a feeding to evaluate positioning, latch, milk transfer, maternal responses, and infant satiety. Attention to these issues during the new- born period allows dialog with the mother and family and can prevent problems that could occur with improper technique or knowledge of tion patterns, breast engorgement, breast care, and maternal nutrition are important aspects of the hospital discharge process. A follow-up appointment with a lactation specialist is recommended within 24-48 hours after hospital discharge. The AAP recommends that exclusively breastfed infants start supplementation with vitamin D (10 mcg, or 400 IU) by 2 weeks of life. 

410 Part V • Nutrition Table 61.2 Absolute and Relative Contraindications to Breastfeeding Because of Maternal Health Conditions MATERNAL HEALTH CONDITION HIV and HTLV infection DEGREE OF RISK In the United States, breastfeeding is contraindicated In other settings, health risks of not breastfeeding must be weighed against the risk of transmitting the virus to the infant. Tuberculosis infection Direct breastfeeding is contraindicated until completion of approximately 2 wk of appropriate maternal therapy. Varicella-zoster infection Infant should not have direct contact with active lesions. Infant should receive immune globulin. Herpes simplex infection Breastfeeding is contraindicated with active herpetic lesions of the breast. CMV infection May be found in milk of mothers who are CMV seropositive. Transmission through human milk causing symptomatic illness in term infants is uncommon. Hepatitis B infection Intants routinely receive hepatitis B immune globulin and hepatitis B vaccine if mother is HBAg positive. No delay in initiation of breastfeeding is required Hepatitis C Breastfeeding is not contraindicated infection COVID-19 Ebola Brucellosis Live vaccines Alcohol intake Cigarette smoking Marijuana usage Maternal infection is not a contraindication for breastfeeding or feeding expressed milk. Confirmed maternal Ebola intection is a contraindication to breastfeeding and expressed milk. Active untreated brucellosis is a contraindication to breastfeeding and expressed milk. Smallpox and yellow fever live-virus vaccines are contraindicated for breastfeeding mothers. Limit maternal alcohol intake to <0.5 g/kg/day (for a woman of average weight—this is the equivalent of 2 cans of beer, 2 glasses of wine, or 2 oz of liquor). Discourage cigarette smoking, but smoking is not a contraindication to breastfeeding Metabolites, including tetrahydrocannabinol, are detectable in breast milk. Marijuana usage is not recommended but is not a strict contraindication to breastfeeding. Breastfeeding is generally contraindicated. Chemotherapy, radio- pharmaceuticals CMV, Cytomegalovirus; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HTLV, human T-lymphotropic virus. Adapted from Schanler RJ, Krebs NF, Mass SB (eds). Breastfeeding Handbook for Physicians, 2nd ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2014: 223-226. Nipple pain is one of the most common complaints of breastfeeding mothers in the immediate postpartum period. Poor infant position- ing and improper latch are the most common reasons for nipple pain bevond the mild discomfort felt early in breastfeeding. If the problem persists and the infant refuses to feed, evaluation for nipple candidia- sis is indicated. If candidiasis is present, the nipples can be treated with an antifungal cream that is wiped off of the breast before feeding, and the infant is treated with an oral antifungal medication. Table 61.3 Conditions for Which Human Milk May Have a Protective Effect • Diarrhea • Otitis media • Urinary tract infection • Necrotizing enterocolitis • Septicemia • Infant botulism • Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus • Celiac disease INFANT MOTHER • Crohn disease • Uterine atony • Lymphoma • Breast cancer • Leukemia • Ovarian cancer • Recurrent otitis media • Cardiovascular • Atopy disease • Hospitalizations for • Obesity respiratory illness • Type 2 diabetes • Sudden infant death syndrome • Obesity Table 61.4 Ten Hospital Practices to Encourage and Support Breastfeeding*† 1. Have a written breastfeeding policy that is routinely communicated to all healthcare staff. 2. Train all healthcare staff in the skills necessary to implement this policy. 3. Inform all pregnant women about the benefits and management of breastfeeding 4. Help women initiate breastfeeding within 1 hour of birth. 5. Show women how to breastfeed and how to maintain lactation, even if they are separated from their newborns. 6. Give newborns no food or drink other than breast milk unless medically indicated 7. Practice rooming-in; allow mothers and newborns to remain together 24 hours a day. 8. Encourage breastfeeding on demand. 9. Give no pacifiers or artificial nipples to breastfeeding infants.# 10. Foster the establishment of breastfeeding support groups and refer to them on discharge from the hospital or birth center. COMPONENTS OF SAFE POSITIONING FOR THE NEWBORN 2. Infant's head is in "sniffing" position. 3. Infant's nose and mouth are not covered. 4. Infant's head is turned to one side. Infant's neck is straight, not bent. Infant's shoulders and chest face mother. 7. Infant's legs are flexed. 8. Infant's back is covered with blankets. 9. Mother-infant dyad is monitored continuously by staff in the delivery environment and regularly on the postpartum unit. 10. When mother wants to sleep, infant is placed in bassinet or with another support person who is awake and alert. *The 1994 report of the Healthy Mothers, Healthy Babies National Coalition Expert Work Group recommend that the UNICEF-WHO Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative be adapted for use in the United States as the United States Breastfeeding Health Initiative, using the adapted 10 hospital practices noted. *Data from Baby-Friendly USA. Guidelines and evaluation criteria for facilities seeking baby- friendly designation. Sandwich, MA: Baby Friendly USA; 2010. Available at https://www.b abyfriendlyusa.org/for-facilities/practice-guidelines/. Accessed 10 November 2022. From ACOG Committee Opinion. Optimizing support for breastfeeding as part of obstetric practice. Obstet Gynecol. 2018; 132(4):e187-e195, Boxes 1 and 2, pp. e191-e192. *The American Academy of Pediatrics endorsed the UNICEF-WHO Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding, but does not support a categorical ban on pacifiers because of their role in reducing the risk of sudden infant death syndrome and their analgesic benefit during painful procedures when breastfeeding cannot provide the analgesia. **Data from Ludington-Hoe SM, Morgan K. Infant assessment and reduction of sudden unexpected postnatal collapse risk during skin-to-skin contact. Newborn Infant Nurs Rev. 2014;14:28-33. Tongue-tie (ankyloglossia) has been associated with nipple pain, poor latching, and poor weight gain in breastfed and bottle-fed infants. Ankyloglossia is defined as a lingual frenulum that attaches close to the anterior tongue tip and is estimated to be present in 4-11% of new- borns. Frenotomy is a minor surgical procedure with few complications 

Table 61.5 Recommendations on Breastfeeding Management for Healthy Term Infants 1. Exclusive breastfeeding for about 6 months • Breastfeeding preferred; alternatively, expressed mother's milk or donor breast milk • To continue for 2 years or beyond as long as mutually desired by mother and child • Complementary foods rich in iron, zinc, and other micronutrients should be introduced at about 6 mo of age 2. Peripartum policies and practices that optimize breastfeeding initiation and maintenance should be compatible with the AAP and Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Model Hospital Policy and include the following: • Direct skin-to-skin contact with mothers immediately after delivery until the first feeding is accomplished and encouraged throughout the • Delay in routine precy axis eith ate the tring, bathings compd tests, • Delay in administration of intramuscular vitamin K until after the first feeding is completed but within 6 hr of birth : Ensure formal evaluation and documentation of breastfeeding by trained caregivers (including position, latch, milk transfer, examination) at least once for each nursing shift • Give no supplements (water, glucose water, commercial infant formula, or other fluids) to breastfeeding newborn infants unless medically indicated using standard evidence-based guidelines for the management of hyperbilirubinemia and hypoglycemia : Ain daily era wiferine i ops a lu upsrital discharge 3. All breastfeeding infants should be seen by a pediatrician within 48-72 hr after discharge from the hospital : Evaluate 279% bidow bi elimination patte is additional weight loss on day 5 or later, providers should consider more frequent follow-ups and/ or referral to a lactation consultant. : Disses maternal/infant issues 4. Mother and infant should sleep in proximity to each other to facilitate breastfeeding 5. Pacifier should be offered, while placing infant in back-to-sleep- position, no earlier than 3-4 weeks of age and after breastfeeding has been established From American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Breast-feeding and the use of human milk. Pediatrics. 2012;129:827-e841. Table 61.6 Patterns of Milk Supply DAY OF LIFE MILK SUPPLY Day 1 Some milk (~5 mL) may be expressed. Days 2-4 Lactogenesis; milk production increases. Day 5 Milk present; fullness and leaking are felt. Day 6 onward Breasts should feel "empty" after feeding. Adapted from Neifert MR. Clinical aspects of lactation: promoting breastfeeding success. Clin Perinatol. 1999;26:281-306. and has been used as a treatment option for ankyloglossia with increas- ing frequency despite insufficient evidence that it improves breastfeed- ing outcomes, making its use somewhat controversial. Most infants with ankyloglossia have no feeding problems, and most infants with nursing problems do not have ankyloglossia. Providing a feeding evaluation and assessment of latch while monitoring weight over the course of 2-3 weeks may be more valuable than proceeding immedi- ately to frenotomy. During that time many feeding issues resolve, thus avoiding unnecessary frenotomy. Engorgement may occur in the second stage of lactogenesis (typi- cally days 3-10 postpartum) and is characterized by the breasts feeling Chapter 61 • Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents 411 firm, overfilled, and sometimes painful. Incomplete removal of milk as a result of ineffective breastfeeding technique or infant illness can cause engorgement. Breastfeeding immediately at signs of infant hunger can prevent this from occurring. To reduce engorgement, breasts may be softened before infant feeding with a combination of hot compresses and manual expression of milk. To reduce inflamma- tion and pain, between feedings mothers can wear a supportive bra, apply cold compresses, and take oral nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Mastitis occurs in 2-3% of lactating women and is usually unilateral, manifesting with localized warmth, tenderness, edema, and erythema after the second postdelivery week. Sudden onset of breast pain, myal- gia, and fever with fatigue, nausea, vomiting, and headache can also occur. Organisms implicated in mastitis include Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, group A streptococcus, Haemophilus influenzae, Kleb- siella pneumoniae, and Bacteroides species. Diagnosis is confirmed by physical examination. Treatment is with oral antibiotics (most com- monly dicloxacillin or cephalexin) and analgesics, while at the same time promoting breastfeeding or emptying of the affected breast. A breast abscess is a much less common complication of mastitis, but it is a more serious infection that requires intravenous antibiotics and incision and drainage, along with continued breast emptying. Wash- ing hands thoroughly before breastfeeding or pumping, especially after changing the baby's diapers, can help minimize risk for breast infections. Insufficient milk intake, dehydration, and jaundice in the infant can occur within the first weeks of life. In fact, retrospective studies suggest higher rates of hospitalization-primarily caused by jaundice and poor weight gain—in the hrst month of life for breastfed versus formula- fed babies, highlighting the critical importance of lactation support. Breastfed neonates feed 8-12 times a day. Signs that milk intake is not adequate include lethargy, delayed stooling, decreased urine output, weight loss >10% of birthweight, hypernatremic dehydration, incon- solable crying, and increased hunger. Insufficient milk intake may be caused by inadequate milk production and/or health conditions in the infant that prevent proper breast stimulation. Careful attention to prenatal history can identify maternal factors associated with low milk production (for example, obesity, type 2 diabetes, postpartum hemor- rhage, or failure of breasts to enlarge during pregnancy or within the first few days after delivery). Excess weight loss or failure to return to birthweight by 7-10 days in an exclusively breastfed infant should trig- ger an evaluation of breastfeeding effectiveness. Direct observation of breastfeeding can help identify improper technique, and test weighs (weighing the infant before and after feeding) may help assess milk transfer. If a large volume of milk is expressed manually after breast- feeding, the infant might not be extracting enough milk, eventually leading to decreased milk output. Late preterm infants (34-36 weeks) are at particular risk for insufficient milk intake because of weak suck, difficulty coordinating suck and swallow patterns, or medical issues. Breastfeeding jaundice, also referred to as suboptimal intake jaun- dice, is related to insufficient fluid intake during the first week of life and is a common reason for hospital readmission of healthy breast- fed infants (see Chapter 137). Breastfeeding jaundice is associated with dehydration and hypernatremia. Treatment may require supple- mentation with expressed maternal breast milk, donor milk, or infant formula. Breast milk jaundice is a different disorder that causes per- sistently high serum indirect bilirubin in thriving, healthy, well-fed infants. Breast milk contains inhibitors of glucuronyl transferase and causes enhanced absorption of bilirubin from the gut. Breast milk jaundice becomes evident later than breastfeeding jaundice and gen- erally declines in the second to third week of life. Infants with severe or persistent jaundice or a direct hyperbilirubinemia need evaluation for other medical causes (see Chapter 137). Persistently high bilirubin levels may require treatment with phototherapy without cessation of breastfeeding or changing from breast milk to infant formula for 24-48 hours if phototherapy is not available or if a rapid reduction in total serum bilirubin is urgently needed. Breastfeeding can resume after the decline in serum bilirubin. Parents can be encouraged to continue col- lecting breast milk during the period the infant is taking formula. 

412 Part V • Nutrition Breast milk collection by pumping is a common practice when the mother and baby are separated and when families wish for other care- givers to engage in infant feeding. Electric breast pumps are generally more efficient and better tolerated by mothers than manual pumps or hand-expression, but not all insurance companies cover electric pumps. Good handwashing and hygiene are important during all steps of pumping. Collection kits should be cleaned with hot soapy water, rinsed, and air-dried after each use. Glass or plastic containers can be used to collect the milk. Fresh milk can be stored at room temperature for up to 4 hours and in the refrigerator for up to 4 days. Expressed breast milk can be frozen and used for up to 6-12 months; frozen milk should be used within 24 hours of thawing. Human milk should never be microwaved. Paced bottle feeding helps support breastfeeding dur- ing bottle feeds by matching the slower pace of direct breastfeeding. Growth of the breastfed infant differs from that of the formula- fed infant; the infant's risk for excess weight gain during late infancy may be associated with bottle feeding (whether formula or expressed human milk). The WHO growth charts are based on growth patterns of healthy breastted infants through the hrst year of life. The infants were selected based on being breastfed, having good healthcare, an absence of socioeconomic constraints, and nonsmoking mothers, so that they reflect the growth pattern of breastfed infants in optimal conditions and can be used as prescriptive standards rather than as normative ref- erence curves. Charts are available for growth monitoring. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends use of the WHO growth charts for infants from birth to 2 years and CDC growth charts for ages 2 to 20 years (see Chapter 27). Formula Feeding Despite efforts to promote exclusive breastfeeding through 6 months, only ~55% of women in the United States continue any breastfeeding at 6 months. Parental preferences are the most common reason for using infant formula and may relate to return to work, perceived poor milk supply, lack of support, or other factors. Most parents make their infant feeding choices early in pregnancy. However, infant formula is also indicated for infants whose intake of breast milk is contraindicated for infant factors (e.g., inborn errors of metabolism) or maternal factors (see Table 61.2). In addition, infant formula may be used as a supple- ment to support inadequate weight gain in breastfed infants, though often formula is used to supplement based upon caregiver perception of benefit rather than medical necessity. Infant formulas marketed in the United States are safe and nutrition- ally adequate as the sole source of nutrition for healthy infants for the first 6 months of life. Infant formulas are available in ready-to-feed, concentrated liquid, and powder forms. Ready-to-feed products gener- ally provide 19-20 kcal/30 mL (1 oz) and approximately 64-67 kcal/100 mL. Concentrated liquid products, when diluted according to instruc- tions, and powder formulas, when mixed according to instructions (typically 2 ounces of water plus one scoop of powder), will result in similar caloric density. Although infant formulas are manufactured in adherence to good manufacturing practices and are regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), there are potential safety issues. Ready-to-feed and concentrated liquid formulas are commercially sterile, but pow- der preparations are not. Although the number of bacterial colony- forming units per gram (CFU/g) of powder formula is generally lower than allowable limits, outbreaks of infections with Cronobacter sakazakii (previously Enterobacter sakazakii) have been documented, especially in premature infants. The powder preparations can contain other coliform bacteria but have not been linked to disease in healthy term infants. Care must be taken to follow the mixing instructions to avoid overdilution or underdilution, to use clean water, and to use the specific scoops provided by the manufacturer because scoop sizes vary. Water that has been boiled must cool fully to prevent degrada- tion of heat-labile nutrients, specifically vitamin C. Well water should be tested regularly for bacteria and toxin contamination. Testing may also identify high lead concentrations in water flowing through pipes installed before 1986. Municipal water can contain variable concentra- tions of fluoride, and if the concentrations are higher than 2.0 mg/L, use of bottled water that is defluoridated is preferred to avoid possible toxicity and tooth discoloration. Proper handwashing is important before preparing formula for the infant. Formula storage guidelines vary based on preparation. Once opened, ready-to-feed and concentrated liquid containers can be covered and stored in the refrigerator for no longer than 48 hours. Manufacturer guidelines recommend storing powder formula in a cool, dry place but not in the refrigerator; once opened, cans can be covered with the original plastic cap or aluminum foil, and the pow- dered product used within 4 weeks. The CDC recommends using pre- pared formula within 24 hours, regardless of type. The CDC further recommends using formula within 2 hours of removal from the refrig- erator and within 1 hour from the start of a feed. Prepared formula stored in the refrigerator can be warmed by placing the container in warm water for about 5 minutes. Formula should never be heated in a microwave because it can heat unevenly and result in burns, despite appearing to be at the right temperature when tested. Formula feedings are ideally provided ad libitum, with the goal of achieving growth and development to the child's genetic potential. The usual intake to allow a weight gain of 20-30 g/day in the first 2-3 months of life is approximately 140-180 mL/kg/day, although some may require intake outside this range. The average rate of weight gain declines from 3 to 12 months of age (see Chapters 27 and 64). Over- feeding with resultant rapid weight gain increases the risk for develop- ing obesity and is to be prevented. Paced bottle feeding may help avoid COW'S MILK PROTEIN-BASED FORMULAS Intact cow's milk protein-based formulas are appropriate for most term infants. There are nutritional differences between formula and breast milk, although the effects of these differences on long-term health are unknown. Formulas contain 10-35 times higher iron com- pared with breast milk and higher zinc, sodium, and vitamin D. Most formulas in the United States also contain considerably higher protein than in mature breast milk. This concentration is designed to meet the needs of the youngest infants but may lead to excess protein intake for older infants and has been associated with increased risk of obesity. In contrast, breast milk protein content decreases over time to match needs. Protein concentration and composition differences between human milk and cow's milk-based formulas result in different plasma amino acid profiles in infants on different feeding patterns, but clinical significance has not been demonstrated. Fat provides 40-50% of the energy in cow's milk-based formulas and is primarily from plant and animal oils. Fat blends are better absorbed than dairy fat and provide saturated, monounsaturated, and polyun- saturated fatty acids (PUFAs). All infant formulas are supplemented with long-chain PUFAs, specifcally docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and arachidonic acid (ARA). DHA and ARA are found at varying concen- trations in human milk and vary by geographic region and maternal diet. The DHA and ARA added to formulas are derived from single-cell microfungi and microalgae and are classified as "generally recognized as safe" (GRAS) for use in infant formulas at approved concentrations and ratios. Long-term studies are lacking on the relationship between routine supplementation of formula with long-chain PUFAs and physi- cal, neurodevelopmental, or visual outcomes of term infants. Lactose is the major carbohydrate in breast milk and in standard cow's milk-based formulas for term infants. Formulas for term infants may also contain modified starch or other complex carbohydrates like prebiotic oligosaccharides similar to those in human milk. SOY PROTEIN-BASED FORMULAS Soy protein-based formulas on the market are all free of cow's milk-based protein and lactose. They meet the vitamin, mineral, and electrolyte guidelines from the AAP and the FDA for feeding term infants. In term infants, although soy protein-based formulas have been used to provide nutrition resulting in normal growth pat- terns, there are few indications for use in place of cow's milk-based formula. Indications for soy formula include galactosemia, prefer- ence for a vegetarian diet, and hereditary lactase deficiency, because 

Chapter 61 • Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents 413 soy-based formulas are lactose free. Most healthy infants with acute gastroenteritis can be managed after rehydration with continued use of breast milk or cow's milk-based formulas and do not require a lactose-free formula. However, soy protein-based formulas may be indicated when documented secondary lactose intolerance occurs. Soy protein-based formulas have no advantage over cow's milk pro- tein-based formulas as a supplement for the breastfed infant, unless the infant has one of the indications noted previously. Soy protein- based formulas are contraindicated for preterm infants because of concerns about protein quality and aluminum content. The rou- tine use of soy protein-based formula has no proven value in the prevention or management of infantile colic, fussiness, or atopic disease. Infants with documented cow's milk protein-induced enteropathy or enterocolitis often are also sensitive to soy protein and should be fed using an extensively hydrolyzed or amino acid- based formula. PROTEIN HYDROLYSATE FORMULAS Protein hydrolysate formulas may be partially hydrolyzed, contain- ing oligopeptides with a molecular weight of <5,000 daltons (range 3,000-10,000 Da), or extensively hydrolyzed, containing peptides with a molecular weight <3,000 Da. These formulas are lactose free and can include medium-chain triglycerides, making them use- ful in infants with gastrointestinal malabsorption caused by cystic fibrosis, short bowel syndrome, prolonged diarrhea, or hepatobili- ary disease. Partially hydrolyzed protein formulas have fat blends similar to cow's milk-based formulas, and carbohydrates are sup- plied by corn maltodextrin or corn syrup solids. Because the pro- tein is only partially hydrolyzed, these formulas are not appropriate for infants who are allergic to cow's milk protein. There is insuf- ficient evidence to recommend use of hydrolyzed formulas to pre- vent atopic dermatitis or other atopic diseases in high-risk infants. Extensively hydrolyzed tormulas are recommended for infants intolerant to cow's milk or soy proteins. AMINO ACID FORMULAS Amino acid (elemental) formulas are peptide-free formulas that con- tain mixtures of essential and nonessential amino acids. They are designed for infants with cow's milk-based protein allergy who fail to thrive on extensively hydrolyzed protein formulas. The effective- ness of amino acid formulas to prevent atopic disease has not been studied. OTHER FLUIDS IN INFANTS AND TODDLERS Neither breastfed nor formula-fed infants require additional water unless dictated by a specific condition involving excess water loss, such as diabetes insipidus. Vomiting and spitting up are common in healthy infants. When weight gain and general well-being are noted, no change in formula is necessary. Whole cow's milk can impair iron absorption and is not recommended for infants younger than 12 months. Nondairy, very low-protein milks are also inadequate to meet infant nutritional needs. Prune or apple juice may be used in small amounts for treatment of constipation, but juice is not recom- mended for routine consumption in infants. Infants with vomiting caused by gastroenteritis may need to consume an oral electrolyte solution but will need close monitoring and ideally will consume the solution for less than 24 hours. Goat milk is not an appropriate substitution for formula. Goat milk has been shown to cause sig- nificant electrolyte disturbances and anemia because it has low folic acid concentrations. Likewise, homemade formulas, which typically involve a combination of raw cow, raw goat, or plant-based milk, cod liver oil, molasses, and other ingredients, cannot be considered safe for infant feeding. Mixing homemade formula incorrectly can put unnecessary stress on a newborn's kidneys and intestines and may not provide sufficient calories or micronutrients. Infants and young children are also particularly susceptible to infections such as Escherichia coli, Campylobacter, Listeria, Brucella, and Salmo- nella found in raw or unpasteurized milk. COMPLEMENTARY FEEDING The timely introduction of complementary foods (solid and liquid toods other than breast milk or formula, also called weaning toods) during infancy is important for nutritional and developmental reasons Table 61.7). The AAP recommends exclusive breastfeeding for about the first 6 months, after which nutrient requirements cannot be met by breastfeeding alone. Table 61.7 summarizes the AAP recommen- dations for introducing complementary foods, though nearly 25% of parents do not adhere to current guidelines (e.g., introducing comple- mentary foods too early or introducing inappropriate foods, such as cow's milk, in children under 12 months). Complementary foods should be introduced around 6 months and be varied to ensure adequate macronutrient and micronutrient intake. Although there is not currently evidence to promote a rec- ommended order in which to introduce foods, information about important nutrients is included here. Additionally, a wide variety of textures is important for oral motor development, typically starting with pureed or very soft (easy to mash with the gums) foods. This is also a good time to establish consistent eating routines, including providing predictable meal and snack times for solid foods, eating in a safe dedicated space (such as in a highchair at the family table), and eating with family members to the extent possible. Continued breastfeeding up to 24 months of age and use of infant formula until 12 months is encouraged. Some complementary foods are more nutritionally beneficial than others. Iron- and zinc-rich foods (such as fortified infant cereals, age- appropriate meats, eggs, and legumes) are especially important for breastfed infants, whose iron and zinc stores decline over time and are not sufficiently replaced through consumption of breast milk. Yogurt and cheese (including soy-based products) without added sugars are appropriate for infants receiving complementary foods, but full-fat cow's milk as a replacement for infant milk is inappropriate before 12 months. In addition to honey and unpasteurized consumables, foods and beverages with added sugars and those high in sodium are not rec- ommended. Overconsumption of energy-dense complementary foods (e.g., cakes, cookies, fried foods, and sugar-sweetened beverages) can lead to excessive weight gain in infancy, increasing the risk of obesity Early introduction of peanuts and eggs around 4-6 months helps to prevent the development of food allergies. Although data are limited for other highly allergenic foods, the strength of current evidence sug- gests that introducing other allergenic foods early in complementary Table 61.7 Important Principles for Weaning • Begin around 6 mo of age. • Introduce one new food at a time. • Choose foods that provide key nutrients and help meet energy needs. • Iron-containing foods (meat, iron-supplemented cereals) are required, especially for breastfed infants. • Zine intake should be encouraged with foods such as meat, dairy products, and fortified infant cereal. • Phytate intake should be low to enhance mineral absorption. • By 7-8 mo infants should be consuming foods from all food groups. • Between 9 and 12 mo of age, encourage a cup rather than a bottle. • Fluids other than breast milk, formula, and water should be discouraged. • Breast milk can continue up to 24 mo of age; cow's milk can be introduced at 12 mo of age and up to 24 oz/day of cow's milk can be consumed if breastfeeding is discontinued. • Give no more than 4 oz/day of 100% fruit juice; no sugar- sweetened beverages. • Encourage routine mealtimes and responsive feeding, watching for and responding to the child's hunger and satiety cues. Adapted from American Academy of Pediatrics. Pediatric Nutrition Handbook, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2019. 

414 Part V • Nutrition feeding may prevent IgE-mediated food allergies. The most recent guidelines from the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology recommend early introduction of the top 9 highly aller- genic foods (dairy, soy, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, sesame, wheat, fish, and shellfish) for all children, especially those at higher risk for atopic disease. For more information, see Chapter 192. TRANSITION TO MILK Whole cow's milk can be introduced at 12 months, and formula- fed children are transitioned to milk at this time. In children 12-24 months, for whom overweight or obesity is a concern or who have a family history of obesity, dyslipidemia, or cardiovascular disease, the use of reduced-fat milk may be appropriate. Otherwise, whole milk is recommended until age 24 months, after which changing to 1% milk helps reduce overall dietary intake of fat if this is a con- cern. The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) does not provide 2% or whole milk for children over 24 months unless authorized by a medical provider. Regardless of the type, all animal milk consumed should be pasteur- ized because of the infection risk with raw or unpasteurized milk, as discussed earlier. Nondairy alternatives to milk from plant-based (e.g., soy, hemp, pea, oat, rice) and nut-based (e.g., almond, cashew, peanut) sources are popular. When counseling parents, it is important to emphasize that the overall nutritional content and quality of plant-based milk alternatives is not equivalent to cow's milk. Although most are forti- fied with vitamin A, vitamin D, and calcium, only some soy-, hemp-, and pea-based milk alternatives have comparable protein content, and all products have inferior protein quality. Many plant-based products have added oils and sugars. No nondairy alternative milks are appro- priate substitutions for infant formula or breast milk in infants. Nut- based milks may be suitable for toddlers ≥12 months of age without allergies who have an otherwise adequate diet. Nondairy (vegan) milks vary between products; a careful assessment of ingredients, including protein and micronutrient fortification, must be determined. RESPONSIVE FEEDING Responsive feeding begins in infancy and is associated with desir- able growth outcomes. Responsive feeding refers to recognizing and responding to children's signs of hunger and satiety in a timely and developmentally appropriate manner. Parents are encouraged to learn to recognize signs of hunger (e.g., child leans forward or reaches for food, or opens mouth when offered food) and satiety (e.g., child closes mouth or turns away from food) in infants who receive solid foods so The period from 6 months to 15 months is characterized by acquisi- tion of self-feeding skills as the infant learns to grasp finger foods, use a spoon, and eat soft foods (Table 61.8). Around 12 months of age, the child learns to drink from a cup, and bottle weaning around 12- 15 months is recommended. To prevent dental caries, bedtime bottles should be discouraged, and it is best that cups contain only water out- side of mealtimes. Sugar-sweetened beverages and 100% fruit juice are not recommended for infants less than 12 months. Cups without a lid or with a straw rather than a hard spout are preferred. Baby-led weaning (BLW) typically refers to allowing infants to self- teed soft (often well-cooked) solid or table foods from the very begin- ning of complementary feeding. Presently, many parents are choosing to give their infants finger foods rather than, or in combination with, purees. There is little evidence that BLW leads to improved nutrient status, weight gain, or food acceptance longitudinally. In general, all food textures, including purees, are encouraged to be included in the infant's diet. Parents should be counseled on avoidance of foods that are common choking hazards. FEEDING TODDLERS AND PRESCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN Toddlerhood is a period when eating behaviors and healthful habits can be established, and it is often a confusing and anxiety-generating period for parents. Important goals of early childhood nutrition are to Table 61.8 AGE (mo) Birth to 4-6 Feeding Skills Birth to 36 Months FEEDING/ORAL SENSORIMOTOR SKILLS Nipple feeding, breast or bottle Hand on bottle during feeding (2-4 mo) Maintains semiflexed posture during feeding Promotion of infant-parent interaction 6-9 (transition feeding) Head and neck control Feeding more in upright position Spoon-feeding thin, pureed foods Both hands to hold bottle Finger feeding of easily dissolvable solids introduced Vertical munching of easily dissolvable solids 9-12 Cup drinking Eats lumpy, mashed food Finger feeding for easily dissolvable solids Chewing includes rotary jaw action 12-18 Self-feeding; grasps spoon with whole hand Holds cup with two hands Drinking with four to five consecutive swallows Holding and tipping bottle >18-24 Swallowing with lip closure Self-feeding predominates Chewing broad range of food Up-down tongue movements 24-36 Circulatory jaw rotations Chewing with lips closed One-handed cup holding and open cup drinking with no spilling Using fingers to fill spoon Eating wide range of solid food Total self-feeding, using fork Adapted from Arvedson JC. Swallowing and feeding in infants and young children. GI Motility Online. 2006. https://doi.org/10.1038/gimo17. offer foods that are developmentally appropriate and to begin to foster healthful eating habits that will last a lifetime. Growth after the first year slows dramatically, appetite decreases, motor activity increases, and children naturally become leaner until they reach an adiposity nadir at 4-6 years. Using growth charts to illustrate adequate growth and provide guidance about typical behavior and eating habits can help allay parents concerns if they are explained in a way that parents can understand (Table 61.9). Eating behavior can be erratic, and chil- dren can appear distracted from eating as they explore the environ- ment. Young children may consume a limited variety of foods, and it is common for children to "like" a particular food for a period and then reject the favored food. It can take many offers before children become familiar with and decide to try a novel food, and it is important to help children learn about food without expectations regarding how much they will eat. Recommended Intake and Serving Sizes Toddlers and preschool-aged children usually eat three healthy meals and one to two snacks daily. Recommended daily amounts for each food group can be found in Table 61.10. Toddlers and preschool chil- dren often fail to meet the recommended servings of fruits, vegetables, and fiber, whereas intakes of food with fat and added sugar are exces- sive. Recommended serving sizes of fruits, vegetables, and grains are approximately the size of the child's fist, and a serving size of protein can be the size of the child's palm. It is important to be mindful that some children become overwhelmed when large portions are offered, fearing that they will be expected to finish the entire portion. If parents are concerned about their children eating enough vegetables, giving vegetables at the beginning of the meal has been shown, in some cir- cumstances, to be an effective strategy for increasing vegetable con- sumption in preschool children. Milk continues to be an important 

Chapter 61 • Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents 415 Table 61.9 Suggested Language for Discussing Growth Charts with Families UNDERWEIGHT NORMAL WEIGHT OVERWEIGHT OR OBESE • Looking at how your child's weight is • Looking at how your child's weight is • Looking at how your child's weight is matched for their height, only 2 of 100 matched for their height, 75 of 100 children matched for their height, 99 of 100 children children are at a weight that is lower at the are at a weight that is lower at the same are at a weight that is lower at the same same height. height. height. • Your child's weight for their height is lower • Your child's weight and height are matched • Your child's weight for their height is heavier than what is generally thought to be for each other in a way that is generally than what is generally thought to be thought to be healthy. • BMI looks at the way height and weight are • If you were to line up 100 children of the healthy. • BMI looks at the way height and weight are balanced with each other. Currently your same age by weight, your child would be balanced with each other. Currently your child's BMI is too low, which has a higher child's BMI is too high, which has a higher risk of developing health problems related risk of developing health problems related to weight. to weight. Table 61.10 Recommended Daily Amounts for Children Calories per day* Vegetables Fruits Grains TODDLERS AGES 12-23 MO 700-1,000 ⅔-1 cup ½/2-1 cup 1¾-3 ounces CHILDREN AGES 2-8 YR 1,000-1,400 1-1½2 cups 1-1½ cups 3-5 ounces CHILDREN AGES 9 YR AND OLDER 1,600-3,200 2-4 cups 1½2-2½ cups 5-10 ounces Dairy Protein foods 1⅔3-2 cups 2 ounces 2-2/2 cups 2-4 ounces 3 cups 5-7 ounces Oils 9-13 grams 15-17 grams 22-51 grams *Calorie needs may be higher for children who are active far above typical levels for age. Additionally, calorie needs may change on a daily basis as children experience illness, growth spurts, and variations in activity. Adapted from the U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025, 9th Edition. December 2020. Available at DietaryGuidelines.gov. source of nutrition, particularly protein, fat, calories, and vitamin D, and it is recommended that children consume up to 2-3 cups (16-24 ounces) per day (see Table 61.10). Sugar-sweetened beverages like soda, sports drinks, sweetened tea, or fruit punch are not recom- mended. Toddlers ages 12 months and older can be given up to 4 oz/ day of 100% fruit juice. Grapefruit juice can affect medications metab- olized by CYP34A (e.g., antifungals such as fluconazole and ketocon- azole, antiretrovirals, erythromycin, clarithromycin, fluoxetine, and Feeding Practices In the second year of life, self-feeding is learned, becomes the norm with time, and provides more opportunities for the family to eat together. Self-feeding also provides the child with the autonomy to self-regulate their intake. Child feeding is an interactive process, especially because children receive cues regarding appropriate eating behaviors from par- ents. Parents are encouraged to notice and comment on positive and ignore negative eating behaviors unless the behavior jeopardizes the health and safety of the child. Parents should avoid pressuring young children to eat, particularly pressuring them to eat larger, adult-sized portions. Instead, parents are encouraged to focus on acceptance of a wide variety of healthful foods. In addition, parents are encouraged to eat the same foods with their toddlers to model positive eating behav- iors such as trying and consuming healthful foods. The 2-year-old child can progress from small pieces of soft finger foods to prepared table foods with care. They can also learn how to eat with utensils (as culturally appropriate) over the preschooler period. The young child is not capable of completely chewing and swallowing chewy or hard foods, and hard foods present a chok- ing risk. Hard candies, nuts, popcorn, and raw carrots should be avoided before age 4 years. Foods like hot dogs, sausages, and grapes can be sliced lengthwise to avoid choking. Caregivers should always be vigilant and present during feeding, and the child placed in a highchair or booster seat. The AAP discourages eating in the pres- ence of distractions such as television, tablets, mobile devices, and other screens and eating in a car where an adult cannot adequately observe and assist the child. FEEDING SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS MyPlate The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) MyPlate (www.myplate.gov) is a basis for building an optimal diet for children and adults (Fig. 61.1). MyPlate is based on the 2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. MyPlate provides a visual representation of the different food groups and portion sizes designed for the general public. The website provides reci- pes, weight management strategies, and tools to track calories and physi- cal activity goals. A personalized eating plan based on these guidelines provides, on average over a few days, all the essential nutrients necessary for health and growth, while limiting nutrients associated with chronic disease development. MyPlate can also be used as an interactive tool for customized recommendations based on age, sex, physical activity, and for some populations, weight and height. Print materials from the USDA are also available for families without internet access. The MyPlate model emphasizes making half the plate vegetables and fruits, prioritizing whole grains, and eating protein from both animal and plant sources. A separate dairy section is included. Physical activity recom- mendations to achieve a healthful energy balance are not visually displayed but are provided on the website. MyPlate has removed foods that have low nutritional value, such as sugar-sweetened beverages and sweetened baked goods. In the United States, the vast majority of children and adolescents do not consume a diet that follows the recommendations of MyPlate. The intake of high-calorie/low-nutrient-density foods is much higher than recommended, with frequent consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages (e.g., soda, juice drinks, iced tea, sport drinks), snack foods, 

416 Part V • Nutrition Dairy Fruits Grains Vegetables Protein. ChooseMyPlate.gov Fig. 61.1 MyPlate food guide. (From U.S. Department of Agriculture: http://www.myplate.gov/.) high-fat meat (e.g., bacon, sausage), and high-fat dairy products (e.g., cheese, ice cream). Intake of dark-green and orange vegetables (vs fried white potatoes), whole fruits, reduced-tat dairy products, and whole grains is typically lower than recommended (see Table 61.10 for rec- ommendations). Other common unhealthful eating habits include consuming larger-than-recommended portion sizes; preparing foods with added fat, sugar, or salt; skipping breakfast and/or lunch; graz- ing; consuming packaged snack foods; and following fad diets. MyPlate offers a helpful and customer-friendly tool to assist pediatricians coun seling families on optimal eating plans for short- and long-term health. Diet quality tends to decline with child age, and ensuring that chil- dren and adolescents consume sufhcient nutrient-dense foods is a chal- lenge for many parents. The vast majority of children and adolescents consume more than the recommended amounts of added sodium, sat- urated fats, and added sugars, with ~ 17% of calorie intake coming from highly processed packaged foods. Frequent snacking and consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages are major contributors to this excess and are valuable targets for dietary counseling. Among adolescents, night eating may be an important source of lower-quality food intake that may be missed during a standard diet recall. In the United States, nearly 85% of adolescents consume caffeinated beverages. Although moderate consumption (up to 2.5 mg/kg/day, equivalent to 6 ounces of coffee for a 30-kg child) is generally considered safe, higher levels of caffeine consumption are associated with impaired sleep and with negative physiologic, emotional, and behavioral outcomes. NUTRITION ISSUES OF IMPORTANCE ACROSS PEDIATRIC AGES Eating at Home At home, parents control much of what children and adolescents eat because they typically shop for groceries and monitor which foods are available in the household. Home food availability is associated with child dietary intake: availability of foods such as fruits, vegetables, and dairy has been associated with intake of those foods, whereas availability of foods such as sugar-sweetened beverages is associated with lower diet quality. Parents can help to influence children's healthy food choices by model- ing healthful eating behaviors themselves. Dietary counseling includes encouraging parents to make healthier food choices available and attrac- tive at home and part of routine family meals. Improved diet quality for children is associated with regular family meals while sitting at a table (vs eating alone or watching a TV or other screen), perhaps because of increased opportunities for positive parenting during meals. Although there are many reasons families may be unable to provide an ideal meal Table 61.11 Revised National School Lunch Program and School Breakfast Program Recommendations 1. Portion sizes of food are to be based on age-grade groups. 2. School lunches and breakfasts will have a minimum and maximum calorie level, maximum saturated fat content, and a maximum sodium content. 3. Foods must contain zero grams of trans fat per serving. 4. The inclusion of unsaturated vegetable oils is encouraged within calorie limits. 5. Vegetables and fruits are not interchangeable. 6. Vegetable offerings at lunch must include cup equivalent of the following: dark-green vegetables, bright-orange vegetables, and legumes. 7. No more than half of fruit servings may be in the form of juice. 8. At least one half of bread/grain offered must be whole grain. 9. Milk must be fat free if flavored and either fat free or 1% fat if 10. Students must select a fruit option at breakfast with their meal and either a fruit or a vegetable at lunch for the meal to be Adapted from the National Academies of Engineering, Science and Medicine. School Meals: Building Blocks for Healthy Children. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2010. setting (busy schedules, parents working multiple jobs, no kitchen table), family meals at predictable times are encouraged to the extent families are Another important aspect of food parenting is helping children learn to be mindful of and respond to internal cues of hunger and satiety. This can be a challenge for some families who have children with a propensity to overeat or to eat in response to nonhunger sig- nals (such as eating as an emotional response). Parents can sup- port their children to eat at a slower pace and to chew their food properly. Useful strategies when the child is still hungry after a meal include a 15- to 20-minute pause (to allow the child to engage in another activity) before providing a second serving or offering foods that are insufficiently consumed, such as vegetables, whole grains, or fruits. Eating in Childcare and School Settings Many U.S. toddlers and preschool children attend formal or infor- mal childcare and receive meals and snacks in this setting. There is wide variation in the quality of food offered (if food is provided) and level of mealtime supervision. Parents are encouraged to assess the quality of the food and supervision by asking questions, visiting the center, and taking part in parent committees. Free or reduced- price snacks and meals are provided in childcare centers for low- and medium-income communities through the USDA Child and Adult Care Food Program. Participating programs are required to provide meals and snacks that meet meal regulations set by the USDA, enabling a certain level of food quality. However, many cen- ters and schools still struggle to provide high-quality meals and snacks due to cost. The National School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast Pro- gram provide low-cost meals to millions of children. Guidelines for meals are taken from the Dietary Guidelines for Americans. Recommen- dations include the use of age-grade portion sizes and the amounts of vegetables and fruits, grains, and fats (Table 61.11). Among the necessary components of these programs are training and equipment for school food service staff, school community engagement, parent education, and food industry involvement. Parents are encouraged to assist their child with food choices at school. If children bring their lunch from home, lunch should include, at a minimum, a fruit and/or vegetable, a whole grain, and a protein source. Parents can be directed to www.myplate.gov for healthful lunch ideas. Additionally, parents are encouraged to be aware of school and classroom parties and work with teachers and other parents to ensure children have access to healthy choices. 

Eating Outside the Home The number of meals eaten outside the home or brought home from takeout restaurants continues to increase among all age groups in the United States. 'The increased convenience of this meal pattern is under- mined by the generally lower nutritional value of the meals compared with home-cooked meals. Typically, meals from fast-food or casual restaurants are of large portion size; are dense in calories; and con- tain large amounts of saturated fat, salt, and sugar and low amounts of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables. Although an increasing number of restaurants offer healthier alternatives, the vast majority of what is consumed at restaurants does not fit MyPlate recommendations. Par- ents are encouraged to evaluate menu labels when available, select the healthiest available options, and consider sharing meals to supplement children's meals, which often comprise highly palatable options with low nutrient density. With increasing age, more meals and snacks are also consumed dur- ing peer social gatherings at friends' houses and parties. When a large part of a child's or adolescent's diet is consumed on these occasions, diet quality can suffer because food offerings are typically of low nutri- tional value. Parents and pediatricians need to guide children and teens in navigating these occasions while maintaining a healthful diet and enjoying meaningful social interactions. These occasions may also be opportunities for teens to consume alcohol; consequently, adult super- vision is important. Food Environment Environmental and social challenges can make it difficult for families to make healthful food choices. Although taste is the main determi- nant of food choice, many other complex factors influence that choice, including cost, availability, accessibility, convenience, and marketing strategies, including shelf placement and special pricing. Recognizing the context of food and lifestyle choices can help providers understand lack of changes or "poor adherence" to dietary recommendations and can decrease the frustration often experienced by the pediatricians who might otherwise "blame the victim" for behavior that is not entirely under their control. Local and national efforts to improve access to fresh and unprocessed foods are ongoing but often struggle to address broader issues such as cost or time to prepare foods at home. Responsive Feeding and Contingent Feeding Practices Responsive feeding entails recognizing and responding to children's hunger and satiety cues in an age-appropriate and developmentally appropriate way across all stages of childhood and adolescence (Table 61.12). It also includes providing routines and structure with clear expectations (e.g., providing meals and snacks at scheduled intervals with a variety of healthy foods to choose from and a warm emotional context that promotes positive interactions about food and eating. Responsive feeding strategies can include encouraging Table 61.12 Responsive Feeding Recommendations WAYS TO PROMOTE RESPONSIVE FEEDING WHAT TO AVOID • Have set meal and snack • Allow child to "graze" or eat times and a consistent place small bites throughout the to eat. day. • Select and provide healthful • Allow child to eat whatever snack and meal options. they want. • Allow child to decide what to • Make child eat all of the food eat and how much. on their plate. • Sit and eat with the child. • Leave child to eat by • Encourage child to try what is themselves. on the plate. • Offer the child a (food) reward • Notice when child attempts for eating their food. to try a food: "You tried your • Offer person praise to child: broccoli," or "good job trying "You are a good person for your broccoli." trying your broccoli." Chapter 61 • Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents 417 children to eat foods that are healthful, teaching them about various foods, and involving them in the selection and preparation of meals. Allowing children to select (within reason) how much to eat of each offered food encourages children to listen to internal cues of hunger and satiety. It is common for parents to use food as a reward or sometimes with- draw preferred foods as punishment. Most parents use this practice occasionally, and some use it systematically, starting at young ages. The practice is also commonly used in other settings, such as in child- care, school, or even athletics. Although it is a good idea to limit some unhealthful but desirable foods to special occasions, using food as a reward can be problematic. Making access to food contingent on an accomplishment increases the desirability of that food. Conversely, pressuring children to consume some healthful foods renders those foods less desirable. Therefore phrases such as, "Finish your vegeta- bles, and you will get ice cream for dessert" can result in establishing unhealthful eating habits once the child has more autonomy in food choices. Parents are encouraged to choose items other than food as rewards, such as stickers, inexpensive toys or sporting equipment, additional time for a favorite activity, special family events, or collect- ible items. Similar types of behavior are also seen in schools and extra- curricular events, and parents are encouraged to work with teachers and coaches to identify appropriate alternative rewards. Cultural Considerations in Nutrition and Feeding Food choices, food preparation, eating patterns, and infant feeding practices all have very deep cultural roots. Beliefs, attitudes, and prac- tices related to food and eating are some of the most important com- ponents of cultural identity (Fig. 61.2). In multicultural societies, high dietary variability can be observed. In a world where global marketing forces tend to reduce geographic differences in the types and brands of food that are available, most families are still influenced by their cultural background, especially during family meals at home. There- fore pediatricians are encouraged to become familiar with the dietary characteristics of various cultures in their community, so that they can identify the potential nutritional benefits and concerns related to their patients diets and address concerns in a nonjudgmental way. Vegetarianism Vegetarianism is the practice of following a diet that excludes animal flesh foods, including beef, pork, poultry, fish, and shellfish. There are several variations on the vegetarian diet, some of which also exclude eggs and/or some products produced from animal labor, such as dairy products and honey. Another expression used for different varieties of vegetarianism is plant-based diets. It is important to ask parents or adolescents about their diets when they report following a vegetarian, vegan, or plant-based diet, because these terms may mean different restrictions for different families. Veg- etarian and vegan diets, with extensive knowledge and forethought, can be safely followed by children. Some people practice diets that are even more restrictive, such as those that exclude foods from the allium fam- ily (e.g., onion, garlic, chives) or include only raw foods cooked below a certain temperature. The safety of these more restrictive diets, which can be very limited in macronutrients and micronutrients, has not been studied in children, and these more restrictive diets are not recom- mended. Although being on a vegetarian or vegan diet does not appear to increase the risk of an eating disorder, some teenagers with disor- dered eating may choose such diets to aid in limiting their caloric intake. Vegetarianism, or following a plant-based diet, is considered a health- ful and viable diet: both the U.S. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics and the Dietitians of Canada have found that a properly planned and well-balanced vegetarian diet can satisfy the nutritional goals for all stages of life. Recommendations for healthy vegetarian dietary patterns at all ages can be found in the 2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. Families may benefit from consultation with a registered dietitian to ensure all nutrient requirements are being met. Compared with meat-based diets, vegetarian diets tend to have lower intakes of saturated fat, cholesterol, and animal protein and relatively higher levels of complex carbohydrates, fiber, magnesium, potassium, 

418 Part V • Nutrition Community, demographic, and societal characteristics Ethnicity Socioeconomic status School lunch programs Work hours Child feeding practices Types of foods available in Gender the home Nutritional knowledge DIETARY INTAKE Leisure time Parent dietary intake Parent food preferences Accessibility of recreational facilities Parenting styles and family characteristics Peer and sibling interactions Child characteristics and child risk factors* Family TV viewing Child weight status Age SEDENTARY BEHAVIOR Parent monitoring of child TV viewing Parent PHYSICAL ACTIVITY preference for activity Familial susceptibility to weight gain Parent activity patterns Parent encouragement Parent weight status of child activity Crime rates and neighborhood safety School physical education programs Family leisure time activity Accessibility of convenience foods and restaurants Fig. 61.2 A conceptual framework of the context of food and lifestyle choices. Child risk factors (shown in uppercase lettering) refer to child behaviors associated with the development of overweight. Characteristics of the child (shown in italic lettering) interact with child risk factors and contextual factors to influence the development of overweight (i.e., moderator variables). (From Davison KK, Birch LL. Childhood overweight: a con- textual model and recommendations for future research. Obes Rev. 2001;2:159-171. © 2001 The International Association for the Study of Obesity.) folate, vitamins C and E, and phytochemicals. Vegetarians tend to have a lower body mass index, cholesterol level, and blood pressure and are at decreased risk for cancer and ischemic heart disease. Specific nutri- ents of concern in vegetarian diets include the following: • Iron (see Chapter 72): Vegetarian diets may have similar levels of iron intake as nonvegetarian diets, but iron from plant sources has lower bioavailability than iron from meat sources. Addition- ally, iron absorption may be inhibited by other dietary constituents, such as phytate (found in leafy green vegetables and whole grains). Iron stores are lower in vegetarians and vegans than in nonvegetar- ians, and iron deficiency is more common in vegetarian and vegan women and children. Plant-based foods rich in iron include iron- fortified cereals, black beans, cashews, kidney beans, lentils, oat- meal, raisins, black-eyed peas, soybeans, sunflower seeds, chickpeas, molasses, chocolate, and tempeh. Iron absorption from plants is increased when consumed with vitamin C-containing foods (e.g., bell peppers, citrus fruits, strawberries, tomatoes, broccoli). Periodic monitoring of iron stores may be valuable in vegan and vegetarian children and adolescents with low iron intake. • Vitamin B12: Plants are not a good source of B12 (see Chapter 67.7). Vegetarians may consume vitamin Biz through dairy products and eggs; vegans need fortified foods or supplements. Breastfeeding by B12-unsupplemented vegan mothers can place an infant at risk for vitamin Biz deficiency. Only some infant liquid multivitamins con- tain B12. Vegan children and adolescents may need assessment of vitamin B12 levels if supplementation is inconsistent. • Fatty acids: Vegetarians and vegans may be at risk for insufficient eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and DHA. The inclusion of sources of linolenic acid (a precursor of EPA and DHA), such as walnuts, soy products, flaxseed oil, and canola oil, is recommended. • Calcium and vitamin D: Without supplementation, vegan diets can be low in calcium and vitamin D, putting vegans at risk for im- paired bone mineralization (see Chapter 69). Monitoring serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels can identify patients with deficiency (<30 ng/mL) and start supplementation. Calcium sources include leafy greens with low oxalate, such as broccoli, kale, and Chinese cabbage. Calcium and vitamin D are found in some fortified plant- based milks and yogurts and some brands of orange juice. • Zinc: The bioavailability of zinc in plant sources tends to be low be- cause of the presence of phytates and fiber that inhibit zinc absorp- tion (see Chapter 72). Zinc is found in soy products, legumes, grains, cheese, and nuts. • lodine: Plant-based diets can be low in iodine, and vegetarians and vegans who do not consume iodized salt or sea vegetables (which have variable iodine content) may be at risk of iodine deficiency. The exclusive use of noniodized salt such as Himalayan, sea, or kosher salts could further increase that risk. lodized salt is not typically used in processed foods such as crackers, although some bread products are fortified with iodine. Families may also choose to restrict specific foods in the form of elimination diets to prevent allergies or to treat real or presumed gas- trointestinal disorders. Figure 61.3 provides an approach to elimina- tion/restrictive diets. Organic Food Organic food is defined as produce and ingredients grown without the use of synthetic pesticides, synthetic fertilizers, sewage sludge, geneti- cally modified organisms, or ionizing radiation. Animals that produce organic meat, poultry, eggs, and dairy products are not given antibi- otics or growth hormones. In the United States, certification must be obtained, and USDA regulations must be followed to market food as "organic." Genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in themselves are not thought to be harmful to consume. However, GMOs are modified to be resistant to the effects of herbicides, including glyphosate and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), which give GMOs a selective growth advantage and facilitate use of these chemicals. Glyphosate and 2,4-D have been designated by the International Agency for Research on Cancer as probable and possible human carcinogens, respectively. Therefore higher concentrations of these chemicals in GMO foods are of concern. Parents may prefer organic foods to feed children secondary to concerns regarding chemical and hormonal content of animals and produce. Although nutritional differences between organic and con- ventional foods have been reported (e.g., higher levels of PUFAs, a-tocopherol, and iron and lower levels of cadmium, selenium, and 

Chapter 61 • Feeding Healthy Infants, Children, and Adolescents 419 Assess nutritional risk 0-5 years Indicators for follow-up: • Weight for height or height for age ≤ -2 z-score • Recent static weight/growth faltering or downward crossing of ≥2 centiles or 1 z-score • Feeding difficulties • Exclusion of cow's milk • Food allergy and concomitant atopic eczema • Multiple food elimination • Family is vegetarian or vegan • Other food restrictions due to religious or cultural factors 6-17 years Indicators for follow-up: • Weight for height/BMI ≤ -2 z-score growth faltering or downward crossing of ≥2 centiles or 1 z-score • Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder • Multiple food elimination • Family are vegetarian or vegan • Other food restrictions due to religious or cultural factors 18 years or over Indicators for follow-up: • BMI <18.5 • Exclusion of milk or wheat or multiple foods ≥6 months • Vegetarian or vegan • Other food restrictions due to religious or cultural factors • Presence of another chronic condition • Other dietary restrictions, e.g., diabetes Review intake of key staple foods, amount and frequency, and advise on substitute foods Milk Avoidance • Age-dependent substitute milk • Other cheese and yogurt substitutes, e.g., soy or coconut- based • Assess protein and energy intakes • Calcium, iron, zinc, vitamins A and D supplements may be required Wheat Avoidance • Check need to avoid barley and rye • Advise alternative sources of grains, e.g., oats, rice, corn, quinoa, teff, and buckwheat • Check if wheat substitute foods (gluten-free products) are being eaten • B vitamin and iron supplements may be required Egg Avoidance • If vegetarian, ensure diet is enhanced with other high-protein foods including beans and lentils Fish Avoidance • Omega 3 su pelients may Soy, peanut, tree nut, and seed avoidance • Legumes, e.g., beans and lentils, will often be tolerated, and can be substituted for peanuts or tree nuts • Vegans may need iron, calcium, and B vitamin supplements Vitamin D Check individual requirement for vitamin D High nutritional risk if avoiding both wheat and follow country-specific guidelines for and milk age-appropriate vitamin D supplementation Fig. 61.3 Approach to evaluate risk for adverse elimination diets. BMI, Body mass index. (Modified from Skypala IJ, McKenzie R. Nutritional issues in food allergy. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2019;57:166-178, Fig. 1, p. 172.) iodine), they may not be clinically relevant. Similarly, children con- suming organic foods have lower levels of pesticides in their urine compared with those consuming nonorganic foods, but it remains unclear whether such a reduction is clinically meaningtul. However, other chemicals in the environment, such as the endocrine disruptors bisphenol-A and phthalates (found in plastics), are best avoided. A high frequency of organic food ingestion has been associated with a lower risk of cancer in adults. Nutritional Supplements The use of nutritional supplements as complementary or alterna- tive medicine is increasing, despite limited data on safety and efh- cacy, especially in children. Many parents assume that if a food or supplement is "natural" or "organic," there is no potential for risk and some potential for benefit. However, adverse effects of some dietary supplements have been documented, and some supplements have been discovered to contain common allergens. In the United States, dietary supplements, including botanical and herbal products, are regulated differently from medications. Manufacturers do not have to prove safety or efficacy before marketing the supplement; the potential for adverse effects, inefficacy, unnecessary cost, and con- tamination is therefore high. It can be difficult to compete against the aggressive marketing of food supplements. Medical professionals must also compete against advice from people without a scientific background and those with significant conflicts of interest, particu- larly on the internet. 

420 Part V • Nutrition Pediatricians may be asked whether a child needs to receive a daily multivitamin. Many children do not follow all the guidelines of MyPlate, and parents and pediatricians may be tempted to use multivitamin supplements to fill gaps. The average U.S. diet pro- vides more than a sufficient amount of most nutrients. Therefore multivitamins are recommended only where there is concern for dietary inadequacy, especially when intake of one of the major food groups is very limited or absent (fruits, vegetables, proteins, whole grains, dairy or equivalent). Using vitamin supplements as a sup- port while working to expand dietary variety can help avoid micro- nutrient deficiencies in cases of dietary restriction whether due to food selectivity or for health, cultural, or religious reasons. Food Safety Food safety issues are an important aspect of feeding infants, chil- dren, and adolescents. In addition to choking hazards and food allergies, pediatricians and parents need to be aware of food safety issues related to infectious agents and environmental contaminants. Food poisoning with bacteria, viruses, or their toxins is most com- mon with raw or undercooked food, such as meat, poultry, eggs, and seafood, or cooked foods that have not been handled or stored properly. Unwashed fruits and vegetables may also be contami- nated. The specific bacteria and viruses involved in food poisoning are described in Chapter 259. Many chemical contaminants, such as heavy metals, pesticides, and organic compounds, are present in various foods, usually in small amounts. Because of concerns regarding their child's neurologic development and cancer risk, many questions arise from parents, especially after media coverage of isolated incidents. A recurring debate is the balance between the benefits of seafood for the growing brain and cardiovascular health and the risk of mercury contamination from consuming large, pred- atory fish species. The Food Safety Modernization Act provides the FDA with authority to have stricter control over food produc- tion and distribution, including requirements that manufacturers develop food safety plans. A good source of information for patients and parents can be found at www.foodsafety.gov. Other reliable sources of information include the websites of the U.S. Environ- mental Protection Agency (EPA), FDA, and CDC. Preventive Nutrition Counseling in Pediatric Primary Care An important part of the primary care well child visit focuses on nutrition and growth because most families turn to pediatric health- care providers for guidance on child nutrition. Preventive nutrition is one of the cornerstones of preventive pediatrics and a critical aspect of anticipatory guidance. The first steps of nutrition counsel- ing are nutritional status assessments, primarily achieved through growth monitoring and dietary intake assessment. Although dietary assessment is somewhat simple in infants who have a relatively monotonous diet, it is more challenging at older ages. The goals of dietary assessment in the primary care setting need to include an idea of the eating patterns (time, location, and environment) and usual diet. A basic assessment of the child's intake includes eval- uating meal routine, dietary diversity (ensuring that a child eats foods from all food groups, namely vegetables, fruits, whole grains, sources of iron and protein, and low-fat or nonfat dairy products), and consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages, including 100% fruit juice. Pediatricians can encourage regularly scheduled meals and one or two healthy snacks (depending on the child's age) with grazing, particularly on foods and beverages that are energy dense but of low nutritional value. For more ambitious goals of dietary assessment, referral to a registered dietitian with pediat- ric experience is recommended. After understanding the child's usual diet, existing or anticipated nutritional problems can be addressed, such as diet quality, dietary habits, and portion size. Most nutritional issues, such as overeating or poor food choices, are not solely the result of lack of parents' knowledge but can be the result of access, availability, and economic factors. Therefore nutrition education alone is insufficient in these situations, and pediatricians need to acquire training in behavior- modification techniques such as motivational interviewing (see Chapter 18) or refer to specialists to assist their patients in engaging in healthful feeding and eating behaviors. The physical, cultural, and family environment in which the child lives must be considered so that nutrition counseling is relevant and changes feasible (see Fig. 61.2). The phone app ChangeTalk from the AAP provides free training on motivational interviewing for the prevention and treat- ment of pediatric obesity. One important aspect of nutrition counseling is providing fami- lies with sources of additional information and behavioral change tools. Although some handouts are available from government agencies, the AAP, and other professional organizations for families without internet access, an increasing number of familes rely on the internet to find nutrition information. Therefore pediatricians need to become familiar with common websites so that they can point families to reliable and unbiased sources of information. Per- haps the most useful websites for children are the AAP and USDA MyPlate sites and those of the CDC, FDA, National Institutes of Health, The National Academies, and Food and Nutrition Board for government sources. Other professional resources include the American Heart Association and Academy of Nutrition and Dietet- ics. Unfortunately, there are websites that provide biased or even dangerous information. Examples include dieting sites, sites that openly promote dietary supplements or other food products, and the sites of "nonprofit" organizations that are mainly sponsored by food companies or that have other social or political agendas. Food Security and U.S. Food Assistance Programs Food insecurity is defined as the state of being without reliable access to a sufficient quantity of affordable, nutritious food. In 2016, minoritized households were 1.5 to almost 2 times more likely to be food insecure than the national average of 12.3%. Children in food- insecure homes are more likely to have medical problems, includ- ing asthma and depression, and are more likely to seek emergency medical care. Patients from all backgrounds can experience food insecurity, and selective screening risks reinforcing bias and miss- ing children in need. Answering or "sometimes true" (versus "never") to the following two-question screen has a sensitiv- ity of 97% and specificity of 83% for identifying food insecurity: For the last 12 months: (1) "We worried whether our food would run out before we got money to buy more." (2) "The food we bought just didn't last, and we didn't have money to get more." Several programs exist in the United States to help meet the needs of families experiencing food insecurity. One of the most utilized fed- eral programs is the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC). This program provides nutri- tion supplements to a large proportion of pregnant and postpartum women and children up to their fifth birthday. One of its strengths is that families regularly visit a WIC nutritionist, who can be a useful resource for nutritional counseling. For older children, federal grams provide school lunches, breakfasts, and after-school meals, as well as daycare and summer nutrition. Lower-income families are also eligible for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly known as the Food Stamp Program. This program provides funds directly to families to purchase various food items in regular food stores. Food insecurity screening should be universal in clinical settings. Eligibility criteria for both WIC and SNAP can be found on the programs' federal websites. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Chapter 62 Nutrition, Food Security, and Health Jason M. Nagata and Christine M. McDonald MALNUTRITION AS THE INTERSECTION OF FOOD INSECURITY AND HEALTH INSECURITY Undernutrition is usually an outcome of three factors, often in com- bination: household food supply insecurity, suboptimal childcare practices, and restricted access to or use of health and water/sanita- tion services. In famine and emergency settings, food shortage is the foremost factor, but in many countries with widespread undernutri- tion, food production or access to food might not be the most limiting factor. More important causes might be repeated childhood infections, especially diarrheal diseases associated with an unsanitary environ- ment, poor infant and young child feeding practices, or various chal- lenges that may prevent families from using quality maternal and child health services. Figure 62.1 shows some of the many causal factors on the pathway to undernutrition and how they extend from household and community levels to national/international levels. Inequitable dis- tribution of resources because of political, economic, and agricultural policies often denies families their right to adequate land, water, food, healthcare, education, and a safe environment, all of which can influ- ence nutritional status. Families with few economic resources who know how to care for their children and are enabled to do so can often use available food and health services to produce well-nourished children. If food resources and health services are not available in a community, not used, or not accessible to some families, children might become undernourished. Undernutrition is not confined to low-income countries. It has been noted in chronically ill patients in neonatal and pediatric intensive care units in high-income countries and among patients with burns, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, tuberculosis, cys- tic fibrosis, chronic diarrhea syndromes, malignancies, bone marrow Chapter 62 • Nutrition, Food Security, and Health 421 transplantation, and inborn errors of metabolism (see Chapter 64). Severe malnutrition has been reported in affluent communities in infants whose families believe in fad diets and in infants with food allergies fed nutritionally inadequate foods such as rice "milk," which has a very low protein and micronutrient content (Figs. 62.2 and 62.3; also see Fig. 61.3). FOOD SECURITY Food security exists when all people, at all times, have access to suf- ficient, safe, nutritious food to maintain a healthy and active life. Four main dimensions of food security can be identified: availability, access, utilization, and stability. Availability refers to the supply of food, reflecting the level of food production, food stocks, and net trade. Access is typically defined at the household level, reflecting purchasing power, household food production, and food/cash transfers received through social "safety net" programs. The utilization dimension recog- nizes that even when a household has access to food, it is not necessar- ily shared equitably within a household. Stability refers to being "food secure" at all times: Examples of situations that affect stability are the "lean seasons" before a harvest, natural disasters, political unrest, and rising food prices. lo be food secure, all four dimensions must be met simultaneously. Measuring Food Insecurity The most commonly used measurement of food insecurity is under- nourishment (chronic hunger), which is the proportion of the popu- lation who are unable to meet daily energy requirements for light activities. It is an estimate calculated by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) based on country-level food balance sheets. It does not take nutrient adequacy into account, but has the advantage of being available for almost all countries annually (although with a time lag) and assists in monitoring global trends. In addition, FAO measures food access by asking individuals about their experiences over the last 12 months, such as whether they ran out of food or skipped meals. The responses are graded from mild to severe food insecurity. This rela- tively simple monitoring tool, the Food Insecurity Experience Scale, provides timely information to guide decision-making at national and local levels. In 2020, the FAO estimated that between 720 and 811 million peo- ple, or approximately 9.9% of the world's population, were undernour- ished. More than half of the world's undernourished were found in Conflict Population displacement, migration, disruption to agriculture/food supply Health Insecurity Inadequate health services, unhealthy environment Disease Anorexia, nutrient losses, increased requirements Natural Disasters Drought, flood, hurricane, earthquake Resources and Control Inadequate Education closely-spaced births Inadequate Care for Mothers and Children Psychoaticia Poor Growth Impaired immunity, frequent, more severe infections Undernutrition Political, Economic high foreign debt, poor infrastructure Food Insecurity Food unavailable, unaffordable Inadequate Dietary Intake Poor feeding practices, maternal competence, cultural beliefs Fig. 62.1 Basic, underlying, and immediate causes of undernutrition. 

422 Part V • Nutrition Fig. 62.2 A 14-month-old girl with "flaky paint" dermatitis. (From Katz KA, Mahlberg MH, Honig PJ, et al. Rice nightmare: Kwashiorkor in 2 Philadelphia-area infants fed Rice Dream beverage. J Am Acad Derma- tol. 2005;52:569-S72.) Fig. 62.3 Paired, transverse, homogeneous, and lines noted in all fingernails suggestive of Muehrcke lines in an infant fed diluted cow's milk since birth. Muehrcke lines are an apparent leukonychia most often associated with hypoalbuminemia. (From Williams V, Jayashree M. Muehrcke lines in an infant. J Pediatr. 2017;189:234.) Asia, and more than one third were found in Africa. The majority are rural poor people subsisting on small plots of land or hired as labor- ers and urban poor people who lack the means to grow or buy food. Alongside the 768 million people who are underfed are 1.9 billion who are overweight or obese, reflecting global inequalities and the "double burden of malnutrition" in low- and middle-income countries. Nutrition, Food Security, and Poverty Household food security tracks income closely. With rising incomes, very poor households first increase their dietary energy intake to avert hunger. If incomes rise further, there is a shift to more expensive sta- ple foods and then to a more varied diet with a greater proportion of energy from animal sources, fruits/vegetables, and fats/sugars and less from cereals, roots, and tubers. National economic growth tends to be accompanied by reductions in stunting, but economic growth can pass by poor persons if they work in unaffected sectors or are unable to take advantage of new opportunities because of lack of education, access to credit, or transportation, or if governments do not channel resources accruing from economic growth to healthcare, education, social pro- tection, and other public services and infrastructure. There is good evi- dence that economic growth reduces poverty but does not necessarily reduce undernutrition. Table 62.1 Global Food Security and Nutrition Targets ZERO HUNGER CHALLENGE OBJECTIVES 1. Access to an adequate and stable food supply for all 2. Elimination of stunting in children <2 yr, and no malnutrition in pregnancy and early childhood 3. Sustainable food systems 4. Doubling of smallholder productivity and income, particularly for women 5. No loss or waste of food and responsible consumption WORLD HEALTH ASSEMBLY GLOBAL NUTRITION TARGETS FOR 2025 1. A 40% reduction in the number of stunted children <5yr 2. A 50% reduction in anemia in women of reproductive age 3. A 30% reduction in low birthweight 4. No increase in childhood overweight 5. Increase exclusive breastfeeding rates to at least 50% in the first 6 mo 6. Reduce and maintain childhood wasting to <5% Food Security and Nutrition Targets The period of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) ended in 2015. All developing regions except sub-Saharan Africa achieved the tar- get to halve the proportion of people living in extreme poverty, with the proportion falling from 47% in 1990 to 14% in 2015. Reductions in hun- ger were broadly consistent with those of poverty reduction, and rates of undernourishment in developing regions fell from 23% in 1990 to 13% in 2015. The prevalence of underweight among children under 5 years (another MDG indicator of "hunger") fell from 29% in 1990 to 15% in 2015 for the developing regions combined. Rural children are almost twice as likely to be underweight as urban children, and the poorest quintile is almost 3 times as likely to be underweight as the richest quintile. Eradicating poverty and hunger continue to be core targets of the Sustainable Development Goals, as agreed by 193 countries of the United Nations General Assembly in September 2015, and are to be achieved by 2030. In addition, in 2012 the World Health Assembly agreed to six global nutrition targets to be reached by 2025, measured against a 2010 baseline, and the United Nations Secretary-General launched the Zero Hunger Challenge with five objectives that "would boost economic growth, reduce poverty and safeguard the environ- ment" and "would foster peace and stability" (Table 62.1). Future Food Security Between now and 2050 the world's population is expected to exceed 9 billion, and an increase in the food supply of 70-100% will be needed to feed this larger, more urban, and more affluent populace. Over this same period, the world's food supply is expected to diminish unless i c th in at not. action is taken. Accelerating the decline in fertility rates and reduc- ing overconsumption are basic but difficult actions to bridge the gap between increasing demand and diminishing supply. Equally chal- lenging actions include limiting climate disruption, increasing the effi- ciency of food production, reducing waste, and reducing the demand for meat and dairy foods. The COVID-19 pandemic significantly dis- rupted food systems and exacerbated food insecurity globally. • Limit climate disruption. Drought, floods, and other extreme weather events are becoming more prevalent and destroy crops and livestock, often on a huge scale. Rising sea levels will lead to loss of productive land through inundation and salinization. Acidification of oceans will reduce marine harvests. Because curbing greenhouse gas emis- sions is essential to minimize climate disruption, the goals are (1) to cut fossil fuel use by at least half of present levels by 2050 so as to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and (2) change livestock husbandry and agronomic practices to reduce methane and nitrous oxide (N,O) emissions. • Increase efficiency of food production. Expanding the area of agricul- tural land to any large extent (eg., by deforestation) is not a sus- tainable option because of adverse consequences on ecosystems and biodiversity, although some expansion of food production could be 

achieved by switching good-quality land away from first-generation biofuels. For example, almost 40% of the U.S. corn harvest in 2016- 2017 went to biofuels. Efforts to increase the intensity of production need to be environmentally sustainable. These include optimizing yields by soil and water conservation, removal of technical and fi- nancial constraints faced by farmers, and breeding resource-efficient crops and livestock that are also climate resilient and pest/disease resistant. • Reduce waste. Approximately 30-40% of food is wasted, between harvesting and the market, during retail, at home, and in the food service industry. Better transport and storage facilities in develop- ing countries, less stringent sell-by dates, lower cosmetic standards for fruits and vegetables, and ending supersized portions would help reduce waste. • Change diets. As wealth increases, so does the demand for processed foods, meat, dairy products, and fish. About one third of global ce- real production is fed to animals, so reducing consumption of meat from grain-fed livestock and increasing the proportion derived from the most efficient sources (pigs and poultry) would allow more peo- ple to be fed from the same amount of land. UNDERNUTRITION The greatest risk of undernutrition (underweight, stunting, wasting, and micronutrient deficiencies) occurs in the first 1,000 days, from conception to 24 months of age, and this early effect on growth and development can have adverse consequences on health, intellectual ability, school achievement, work productivity, and earnings in later life. Governments and agencies are therefore advised to focus interven- tions on this critical window of opportunity. Measurement of Undernutrition The term malnutrition encompasses both ends of the nutrition spec- trum, undernutrition as well as overweight and obesity. Many poor nutritional outcomes begin in utero and are manifest as low birth- weight (LBW, <2,500 g). Preterm birth and fetal growth restriction are the two main causes of LBW, with prematurity relatively more common in richer countries and fetal growth restriction relatively more com- mon in lower-income countries. Nutritional status is often assessed in terms of anthropometry (Table 62.2). International standards of normal child growth under optimum conditions from birth to 5 years have been established by the World Health Organization (WHO). To compile the standards, longitudinal data from birth to 24 months of healthy, breastfed, term infants were combined with cross-sectional measurements of children ages 18-71 months. The standards allow normalization of anthropometric mea- sures in terms of z scores (standard deviation [SD] scores). A z score is the child's height (weight) minus the median height (weight) for the child's age and sex divided by the relevant SD. The standards are applicable to all children everywhere, having been derived from a large, multicountry study reflecting diverse ethnic backgrounds and cultural Height-for-age (or length-for-age for children <2 years) is a mea- sure of linear growth, and a deficit represents the cumulative impact of adverse events, usually in the first 1,000 days from conception, that result in stunting, or chronic undernutrition. A low height-for-age typi- cally reflects socioeconomic disadvantage. A low weight-for-height, or wasting, usually indicates acute malnutrition. Conversely, a high weight-for-height indicates overweight. Weight-for-age is the most commonly used index of nutritional status, although a low value has limited clinical significance because it does not differentiate between wasting and stunting. Weight-for-age has the advantage of being some- what easier to measure than indices that require height measurements. In humanitarian emergencies and some community or outpatient set- tings, mid-upper arm circumference is used as a screening tool to identify wasted children (Fig. 62.4). Body mass index (BMI) is calculated by dividing weight in kilo- grams by the square of height in meters. For children, BMI is age and gender specific. BMI-for-age can be used from birth to 20 years and is a screening tool for thinness (less than - 2 SD), overweight (between Chapter 62 • Nutrition, Food Security, and Health 423 Table 62.2 Classification of Undernutrition CLASSIFICATION Gomez (underweight) Waterlow (wasting) Waterlow (stunting) WHO (wasting) INDEX 90-75% of median weight-for-age 75-60% <60% 90-80% of median weight-for-height 80-70% <70% 95-90% of median height-for-age 90-85% <85% < -2 to > -3 SD weight-for-height < -3 WHO (stunting) WHO (wasting) (for age-group 6-59 mo) < -2 to > -3 SD height-for-age < -3 115-125 mm mid-upper arm circumterence <115 mm GRADING Grade 1 (mild) Grade 2 (moderate) Grade 3 (severe) Mild Moderate Severe Mild Moderate Severe Moderate Severe Moderate Severe Voderate Severe SD, Standard deviation; WHO, World Health Organization. Fig. 62.4 Measuring mid-upper arm circumference. (Courtesy Nyani Quarmyne/Panos Pictures.) +1 SD and +2 SD), and obesity (greater than +2 SD). To diagnose obesity, additional measures of adiposity are desirable because a high BMI can result from high muscularity and not only from excess sub- cutaneous fat. Micronutrient deficiencies are another dimension of undernu- trition. Those of particular public health significance are vitamin A, iodine, iron, and zinc deficiencies. Vitamin A deficiency is caused by a low intake of retinol (in animal foods) or its carotenoid precursors, mainly beta-carotene (in orange- colored fruits and vegetables and dark-green leaves) (see Chapter 66). The prevalence of clinical deficiency is assessed from symptoms and signs of xerophthalmia (principally night blindness and Bitot spots). Subclinical deficiency is defined as serum retinol concentration ≤0.70 umol/L. Vitamin A deficiency is the leading cause of preventable blind- ness in children. It is also associated with a higher morbidity and mor- tality among young children. 

424 Part V • Nutrition Iodine deficiency is the world's leading cause of preventable intellectual impairment (see Chapter 72). An enlarged thyroid (goi- ter) is a sign of deficiency. Severe deficiency in pregnancy causes fetal loss and permanent damage to the brain and central nervous system in surviving offspring (cretinism). It can be prevented by iodine supplementation before conception or during the first tri- mester of pregnancy. Postnatal iodine deficiency is associated with impaired mental function and growth stunting. The median urinary iodine concentration in children age 6-12 years is used to assess the prevalence of deficiency in the general population, and a median of <100 mg/L indicates insufficient iodine intake. Iron-deficiency anemia is common in childhood either from low iron intakes or poor absorption, or as a result of illness or parasite infestation (see Chapter 72). Women also have relatively high rates of anemia as a result of menstrual blood loss, pregnancy, low iron intake, poor absorption, and illness. Hemoglobin cutoffs to define anemia are 110 g/L for children 6-59 months, 115 g/L for children 5-11 years, and 120 g/L for children 12-14 years. Cutoffs to define anemia are 120 g/L for nonpregnant women, 110 g/L for pregnant women, and 130 g/L for men. Zinc deficiency increases the risk of morbidity and mortality from diarrhea, pneumonia, and possibly other infectious diseases (see Chap- ter 72). Zinc deficiency also has an adverse effect on linear growth. Deficiency at the population level is assessed from dietary zinc intakes or serum zinc concentrations. For children under 10 years of age, serum zinc cutoffs of <65 ug/dL and <57 ug/dL are used to define zinc deficiency according to whether the blood sample was obtained in the morning or afternoon, respectively. For females 10 years of age or older, cutoffs of <70 ug/dL, <66 ug/dL, and <59 ug/dI are used depending on whether the blood sample was obtained in the morning in a fasted state, the morning in a nonfasted state, or in the afternoon in a non- fasted state, respectively. Prevalence of Undernutrition It is estimated that approximately 14.6% of births worldwide in 2015 were LBW. Rates of LBW are highest (48%) in southern Asia, which are twice those of sub-Saharan Africa. Globally, in 2015, 14% of children <5 years of age were underweight (weight-for-age < -2 SD). The global prevalence of stunting (height-for-age < -2 SD) has declined from 33% in 2000 to 22% in 2017, with the greatest reduc- tions occurring in Asia. Stunting prevalence is highest in the Afri- can region (30%). Wasting (weight-for-height < -2 SD) affects 7% of children <5 years, with minimal change in prevalence over the past 2 decades. These figures represent 149 million stunted children and 50 million wasted children under 5 years of age. Asia carries most of the global burden of underweight children because of the com- bination of large population size and high prevalence. In 2017, 55% of all stunted children and 69% of all wasted children lived in Asia. Africa carries most of the remaining global burden. Approximately 29% of children under 5 years of age in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) suffer from vitamin A defi- ciency. Nationally representative data on the zinc status of children are sparse, but an estimated 17% of the global population is believed to be at risk of inadequate zinc intake. The estimated prevalence of anemia in children and women of reproductive age in 2016 was 42% and 33%, respectively. Iron deficiency is considered to be the primary cause of anemia in 25-42% and 50-60% of anemia cases among children and women, respectively. Universal salt iodiza- tion has made great strides in reducing the global burden of iodine deficiency. However, mild to moderate iodine deficiency remains a public health concern in 25 countries. Consequences of Undernutrition The most profound consequence of undernutrition is premature death (Table 62.3). Fetal growth restriction together with suboptimal breast- feeding in the first month of life contribute to 19% of all deaths in chil- dren <5 years (1.3 million deaths/year). When the effects of stunting, wasting, and deficiencies of vitamin A and zinc are also considered, these six items jointly contribute to 45% of global child deaths (3.1 Table 62.3 CONDITION (a) Fetal growth Global Deaths in Children <5 Years Attributed to Nutritional Conditions ATTRIBUTABLE DEATHS 817,000 restriction (<1 mo) % OF TOTAL DEATHS <5 YR 11.8 (b) Stunting (1-59 mo) (c) Wasting (1-59 mo) (d) Zinc deficiency 1,017,000 875,000 116,000 14.7 12.6 1.7 (12-59 mo) (e) Vitamin A deficiency 157,000 2.3 (6-59 mo) (f) Suboptimal 804,000 11.6 breastfeeding (0- 23 mo) Joint effects of (a) + (f) Joint effects of all 6 1,348,000 3,097,000 19.4 44.7 factors From Black RE, Victora CG, Walker SP, etal. Maternal and child undernutrition and overweight in low- and middle-income countries. Lancet. 2013;382:427-451. million deaths/year), and many more are disabled or stunted for life. Anemia contributes to over one quarter of maternal deaths. The risk of child death from infectious diseases increases even with mild undernutrition, and as the severity of undernutrition increases, the risk increases exponentially (Table 62.4). Undernu- trition impairs immune function and other host defenses; conse- quently, childhood infections are more severe and longer lasting and more likely to be fatal than the same illnesses in well-nourished children. Infections can adversely affect nutritional status, and young children can quickly enter a cycle of repeated infections and ever-worsening malnutrition. Even for the survivors, physical and cognitive damage as a result of undernutrition can affect their future health and economic well-being. For females, the cycle of undernutrition is passed on to the next generation when under- nourished women give birth to LBW babies. Fetal growth restriction and early childhood undernutrition have con- sequences for adult chronic illness. LBW is associated with an increased risk of hypertension, stroke, and type 2 diabetes in adults. This increased risk is thought to reflect "fetal programming," a process by which fetal undernutrition leads to permanent changes in the structure and metab- olism of organs and systems that manifest as disease in later life. The risk is exacerbated by low weight gain during the first 2 years of life. The increased risk of adult chronic disease from undernutrition early in life is a particular challenge to LMICs with rapid economic growth. Stunting before age 3 years is associated with poorer motor and cog- nitive development and altered behavior in later years. The develop- mental quotient (DQ; see Chapter 28) is reduced by 6-13 points. Iodine and iron deficiencies also lead to loss of cognitive potential. Indications are that children living in areas of chronic iodine deficiency have an average reduction in intelligence quotient (IQ) of 12-13.5 points com- pared with children in iodine-sufficient areas. Iron deficiency has a detrimental effect on the motor development of children <4 years and on cognition of school-aged children. The estimated deficit is 1.73 IQ points for each 10 g/L decrease in hemoglobin concentration. Undernutrition can have substantial economic consequences for survivors and their families. The consequences can be quantified in five categories: (1) increased costs of healthcare, either neonatal care for LBW babies or treatment of illness for infants and young children; (2) productivity losses (and thus reduced earnings) associated with smaller stature and muscle mass; (3) productivity losses from reduced cognitive ability and poorer school performance; (4) increased costs of chronic diseases associated with fetal and early child malnutrition; and 

Chapter 62 • Nutrition, Food Security, and Health 425 Table 62.4 Hazard Ratios for All-Cause and Cause-Specific Deaths Associated with Stunting, Wasting, and Underweight in Children <5 Years STANDARD DEVIATION (SD) SCORE HEIGHT/LENGTH-FOR-AGE < -3 -3 to < -2 -2 to < -1 ≥ -1 WEIGHT-FOR-LENGTH < -3 -3 to < -2 -2 to < -1 ≥ -1 WEIGHT-FOR-AGE < -3 -3 to < -2 -2 to < -1 ≥ -1 ALL 5.5 2.3 1.5 1.0 11.6 3.4 1.6 1.0 9.4 2.6 1.5 1.0 DEATHS PNEUMONIA DIARRHEA MEASLES OTHER INFECTIONS 6.4 2.2 1.6 1.0 9.7 4.7 1.0 10.1 3.1 1.9 1.0 6.3 2.4 1.7 1.0 12.3 3.4 1.6 1.0 11.6 2.9 1.7 1.0 6.0 2.8 1.3 1.0 9.6 2.6 1.0 1.0 7.7 3.1 1.0 1.0 3.0 1.9 0.9 1.0 11.2 2.7 1.7 1.0 8.3 1.6 1.5 1.0 From Black RE, Victora CG, Walker SP, et al. Maternal and child undernutrition and overweight in low- and middle-income countries. Lancet. 2013;382:427-451. (5) consequences of maternal undernutrition on future generations. The impact of nutrition on earnings appears to be independent of the effects of childhood deprivation. Interventions for Undernutrition Interventions to address child undernutrition can be divided into those that address immediate causes (nutrition-specinc interventions) and those that address underlying or indirect causes (nutrition-sensitive interven- tions) (Table 62.5). In the short-term, nutrition-specific interventions (e.g., salt iodization) can have substantial impact even in the absence of economic growth, and micronutrient interventions (supplementation and fortification) are consistently ranked as the most cost-effective investment. However, there is increased attention to nutrition-sensitive interventions as the best means of sustainably eliminating malnutrition and to multisec- toral policies that harness the synergism between the two types of inter- ventions (e.g., cross-sectoral linkages among agriculture, nutrition, and health). To reduce the adverse consequences of undernutrition on mor- tality, morbidity, and cognitive development, interventions must encompass both fetal and postnatal periods. Preventing LBW is essential, with emphasis on prevention of low maternal BMI and anemia, and in the longer term, prevention of low maternal stature. Maternal height is a strong predictor of birth outcomes, and approx- imately 6.5 million small-for-gestational age (SGA) or preterm births are associated with maternal short stature each year. Other measures include smoking cessation, birth spacing, delaying preg- nancy until after 18 years of age, and intermittent preventive treat- ment of malaria in malaria-endemic areas. In the postnatal period, promotion and support of exclusive breastfeeding is a high priority. Although the Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative has a marked benefit on rates of exclusive breastfeeding in hospitals, postnatal counsel- ing from community workers or volunteers is needed to facilitate continuation of exclusive breastfeeding at home for 6 months (see Chapter 61). Most studies show a lower risk of HIV transmission with exclusive breastfeeding than with mixed breastfeeding. The risk of HIV transmission by breastfeeding is approximately 5-20% Table 62.5 Examples of Nutrition-Specific and Nutrition-Sensitive Interventions NUTRITION-SPECIFIC NUTRITION-SENSITIVE INTERVENTIONS INTERVENTIONS • Promotion and support for • Increased access to exclusive breastfeeding for affordable, nutritious food; 6mo, and continued smallholder agriculture; credit breastfeeding for at least 2yr and microfinance • Promotion of adequate, timely, • Postharvest food processing and safe complementary and preservation feeding from 6 mo • Vaccination against neonatal • Increased micronutrient intake and childhood illness; access through dietary diversity to healthcare • Micronutrient supplements for • Improved water/sanitation and pregnant women (iron/folate) hygiene (e.g., handwashing and young children (vitamin A, with soap) iron, zinc) in deficient areas • Education; women's • Zinc supplements to children empowerment; gender equality during and after diarrhea • Social protection (e.g., cash (10-20 mg/day for 2 wk) transfers) • Prevention and treatment of • Malaria prevention (vector severe acute malnutrition control/bednets); intermittent • Crop biofortification, food preventive treatment during fortification, salt iodization pregnancy and in children • Reduced heavy physical 3-59 mo activity in pregnancy • Birth spacing; delaying pregnancy until after 18 yr of age depending on duration, but can be reduced to <2% with antiretro- viral drugs. Even without antiretroviral drugs, exclusively breastfed children of HIV-infected mothers in low-income countries have lower mortality than nonbreastfed children, because the latter are at increased risk of death from diarrhea and pneumonia. Interventions to improve infant feeding must be designed for the local setting and thus require careful formative research dur- ing their development. Messages should be few, feasible, and 

426 Part V • Nutrition culturally appropriate. For complementary feeding, the introduc- tion of nutrient-rich energy-dense mixtures of foods at 6 months of age and responsive feeding are often emphasized. Where adequate complementary feeding is difficult to achieve and subclinical defi- ciencies are common, high-dose vitamin A supplementation every 6 months in children 6-59 months of age reduces all-cause mortality and death caused by diarrhea by 12%, and zinc supplementation can reduce 1- to 4-year mortality by 18%, diarrhea incidence by 13%, and pneumonia by 19%. Monitoring of child growth provides an early alert to a nutrition or health problem but is only worthwhile if accompanied by good counseling and growth promotion activities. The impact of growth monitoring and promotion will depend on coverage, intensity of contact, health worker performance and com- munication skills, adequacy of resources, and the motivation and ability of families to follow agreed actions. Other Nutritional Interventions Treatment of vitamin and mineral deficiencies is discussed in Chapters 66-72. Treatment of LBW and intrauterine growth restriction is dis- cussed in Chapter 119. SEVERE ACUTE MALNUTRITION Severe acute malnutrition is defined as severe wasting and/or bilateral edema. Severe wasting is extreme thinness diagnosed by a weight-for-length (or height) < -3 SD of the WHO Child Growth Standards. In children ages 6-59 months, a mid-upper arm cir- cumference <115 mm also denotes severe acute malnutrition: a color-banded tape (see Fig. 62.4) is a convenient way of screening children in need of treatment. Bilateral edema is diagnosed by grasping both feet, placing a thumb on top of each, and pressing gently but hrmly for 10 seconds. A pit (dent) remaining under each thumb indicates bilateral edema. This definition of severe acute malnutrition distinguishes wasted/ edematous children from those who are stunted because stunted children (although underweight) are not a priority for acute clinical care because their deficits in height and weight cannot be corrected in the short term. The previous name protein-energy malnutrition is avoided because it oversimplifies the complex, multifactorial etiology. Other terms are marasmus (severe wasting), kwashiorkor (characterized by edema), and marasmic-kwashiorkor (severe wast- ing and edema). Children with severe acute malnutrition have had a diet insuffi- cient in energy and nutrients relative to their needs. The magnitude of the deficits will differ depending on the duration of inadequacy, quantity and diversity of food consumed, presence of antinutrients (e.g., phytate), individual variation in requirements, and number and severity of coexisting infections and their duration. Infections can lead to profound nutrient deficits and imbalances: For exam- ple, amino acids are diverted to form acute-phase proteins, potas- sium, magnesium, vitamin A, and zinc are lost through diarrhea, and losses of glycine and taurine are linked to small bowel bacterial overgrowth. Ingested microbes can cause villous atrophy and loss of nutrients from maldigestion and malabsorption, as well as dis- ruption of gut barrier function leading to microbial translocation, chronic immune activation, and altered gut microbiome (environ- mental enteric dysfunction). Deficits can also arise from increased nutrient utilization in response to toxins (e.g., cysteine and methio- nine to detoxify dietary cyanogens). Children affected by severe acute malnutrition may have different clinical presentations and metabolic disturbances due to variations in the type and extent of deficits and imbalances in their bodies. This heterogeneity is a result of diverse pathways that lead to severe acute malnutrition. Children who develop edematous malnutrition are more likely than nonedematous children to have had exposures that generate oxidative stress and/or to have greater deficits in free radical-scavenging antioxidants (glutathione; vitamins A, C, and E; and essential fatty acids) or cofactors (zinc, copper, selenium). Table 62.6 Clinical Signs of Malnutrition SITE SIGNS Face Eye Moon face (kwashiorkor), simian facies (marasmus) Dry eyes, pale conjunctiva, Bitot spots (vitamin A), periorbital edema Mouth Angular stomatitis, cheilitis, glossitis, spongy bleeding gums (vitamin C), parotid enlargement Teeth Hair Enamel mottling, delayed eruption Dull, sparse, brittle hair; hypopigmentation; flag sign (alternating bands of light and normal color); broomstick eyelashes; alopecia Skin Loose and wrinkled (marasmus); shiny and edematous (kwashiorkor); dry, follicular hyperkeratosis; patchy hyperpigmentation and hypopigmentation (" crazy paving" or "flaky paint" dermatoses); erosions; poor wound healing Nails Koilonychia; thin and soft nail plates, fissures, or ridges Musculature Muscle wasting, particularly buttocks and thighs; Chvostek or Trousseau sign (hypocalcemia) Skeletall Deformities, usually as a result of calcium, vitamin D, or vitamin C deficiencies Abdomen Distended: hepatomegaly with fatty liver; ascites may be present Cardiovascular Bradycardia, hypotension, reduced cardiac output, small vessel vasculopathy Neurologic Global developmental delay, loss of knee and ankle reflexes, impaired memory Hematologic Pallor, petechiae, bleeding diathesis Behavior Lethargic, apathetic, irritable on handling Gastrointestinal Atrophy of small intestine mucosa, lactase deficiency common Modified from Grover Z, Ee LC. Protein energy malnutrition. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2009;56:1055-1068. Clinical Manifestations of Severe Acute Malnutrition (Table 62.6) Severe wasting is most visible on the thighs, buttocks, and upper arms and over the ribs and scapulae, where loss of fat and skeletal muscle is greatest (Fig. 62.5). Wasting is preceded by failure to gain weight and then by weight loss. The skin loses turgor and becomes loose as subcutaneous tissues are broken down to provide energy. The face may retain a relatively normal appearance, but eventually becomes wasted and wizened. The eyes may be sunken from loss of retroorbital fat, and lacrimal and salivary glands may atrophy, leading to lack of tears and a dry mouth. Weakened abdominal muscles and gas from bacterial over- growth of the upper gut may lead to a distended abdomen. Severely wasted children are often fretful and irritable. In edematous malnutrition the edema is most likely to appear first in the feet and then in the lower legs. It can quickly develop into generalized edema affecting also the hands, arms, and face (Fig. 62.6). Skin changes typically occur over the swollen limbs and include dark, crackled peeling patches ("flaky paint" dermatosis) with pale skin underneath that is easily infected (see Figs. 62.2 and 62.6). The hair is sparse, easily pulled out, and may lose its curl. In dark-haired children, the hair may turn pale or reddish. The liver is often enlarged with fat. Children with edema are uncomfortable, irritable and/or apathetic, and often refuse to eat. 

Fig. 62.5 Child with severe wasting Chapter 62 • Nutrition, Food Security, and Health 427 Pathophysiology When a child's intake is insufficient to meet daily needs, physiologic and metabolic changes take place in an orderly progression to con- serve energy and prolong life. This process is called reductive adap- tation. Fat stores are mobilized to provide energy. Later, protein in muscle, skin, and the gastrointestinal tract is mobilized. Energy is conserved by reducing physical activity and growth, reducing basal metabolism and the functional reserve of organs, and reducing inflammatory and immune responses. These changes have impor- tant consequences: • The liver makes glucose less readily, making the child more prone to hypoglycemia. It produces less albumin, transferrin, and other transport proteins. It is less able to cope with excess dietary protein and to excrete toxins. • Heat production is less, making the child more vulnerable to hypo- thermia. • The kidneys are less able to excrete excess fluid and sodium, and fluid easily accumulates in the circulation, increasing the risk of fluid overload. • The heart is smaller and weaker and has a reduced output, and fluid overload readily leads to death from cardiac failure. • Sodium builds up inside cells because of leaky cell membranes and reduced activity of the sodium-potassium pump, leading to excess body sodium, fluid retention, and edema. • Potassium leaks out of cells and is excreted in urine, contributing to electrolyte imbalance, fluid retention, edema, and anorexia. • Loss of muscle protein is accompanied by loss of potassium, magne- sium, zinc, and copper. • The gut produces less gastric acid and enzymes. Motility is reduced, and bacteria may colonize the stomach and small intestine, damag- ing the mucosa and deconjugating bile salts. Digestion and absorp- tion are impaired. • Cell replication and repair are reduced, increasing the risk of bacte- rial translocation through the gut mucosa. • Immune function is impaired, especially cell-mediated immunity. The usual responses to infection may be absent, even in severe ill- ness, increasing the risk of undiagnosed infection. • Red blood cell mass is reduced, releasing iron, which requires glu- cose and amino acids to be converted to ferritin, increasing the risk of hypoglycemia and amino acid imbalances. If conversion to fer- ritin is incomplete, unbound iron promotes pathogen growth and formation of free radicals. • Micronutrient deficiencies limit the body's ability to deactivate free radicals, which cause cell damage. Edema and hair/skin changes are outward signs of cell damage. When prescribing treatment, it is essential to take these changes in function into account. Otherwise, organs and systems will be over- whelmed, and death will rapidly ensue. Fig. 62.6 Child with generalized edema. Principles of Treatment Figure 62.7 shows the 10 steps of treatment, which are separated into two phases: stabilization and rehabilitation. These steps apply to all clinical forms and all geographic locations, including North America and Europe. The aim of the stabilization phase is to repair cellular function, correct fluid and electrolyte imbalance, restore homeostasis, and prevent death from the interlinked triad of hypo- glycemia, hypothermia, and infection. The aim of the rehabilita- tion phase is to restore wasted tissues (i.e., catch-up growth). It is essential that treatment proceeds in an ordered progression and that the metabolic machinery is repaired before any attempt is made to promote weight gain. Pushing ahead too quickly risks inducing the potentially fatal "refeeding syndrome" (see Chapter 63). Caregivers bring children to health facilities because of illness, rarely because of their malnutrition. A common mistake among healthcare providers is to focus on the illness and treat as for a well- nourished child. This approach ignores the deranged metabolism in malnourished children and can be fatal. Such children should be considered as severely malnourished with a complication, and 

428 Part V • Nutrition Day 1-2 Stabilization Day 3-7 Rehabilitation Week 2-6 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Prevent/treat hypoglycemia Prevent/treat hypothermia Treat/prevent dehydration Correct imbalance of electrolytes Treat infections Correct deficiencies of micronutrients • no iron with iron Start cautious feeding Rebuild wasted tissue (catch-up growth) 9. Provide loving care and play 10. Prepare for follow-up Fig. 62.7 The 10 steps of treatment for severe acute malnutrition and their approximate time frames. Table 62.7 CONDITION Shock • Lethargic or unconscious and • Cold hands Plus either: • Slow capillary refill (>3 sec) or • Weak fast pulse Emergency Treatment in Severe Malnutrition IMMEDIATE ACTION 1. Give oxygen. 2. Give sterile 10% glucose (5 mL/kg) rapidly by IV injection. 3. Give IV fluid at 15 mL/kg over 1 hr, using: • Ringer lactate with 5% dextrose or • Half-normal saline* with 5% dextrose or • Half-strength Darrow solution with 5% dextrose • If all these are unavailable, Ringer lactate 4. Measure and record pulse and respirations at the start and every 10 min. If there are signs of improvement (pulse and respiration rates fall), repeat IV drip, 15 mL/kg for 1 more hr. Then switch to oral or nasogastric rehydration with ReSoMal, 5-10 mL/kg in alternate hr (see Table 62.8 step 3). If there are no signs of improvement, assume septic shock and: 1. Give maintenance fluid IV (4 mL/kg/hr) while waiting for blood. 2. Order 10 mL/kg fresh whole blood and transfuse slowly over 3 hr. If signs of heart failure, give 5-7 mL/kg packed cells rather than whole blood. 3. Give furosemide, 1 mg/kg IV at start of transfusion. See Table 62.8 step 1 for treatment. Hypoglycemia Blood glucose <3 mmol/L Severe dehydration Very severe anemia Hgb <4 g/dL Emergency eye care Corneal ulceration Do not give IV fluids except in shock. See Table 62.8 step 3 for treatment. If very severe anemia (or Hgb 4-6 g/dL and respiratory distress): 1. Give whole blood 10 mL/kg slowly over 3 hr. If signs of heart failure, give 5-7 mL/kg packed cells rather than whole blood 2. Give furosemide 1 mg/kg IV at the start of the transfusion. If corneal ulceration: 1. Give vitamin A immediately (age <6 mo: 50,000 IU; 6-12 mo: 100,000 IU; >12 mo: 200,000 IU) 2. Instill 1 drop atropine (1%) into affected eye to relax the eye and prevent the lens from pushing out. *Some would recommend 5% dextrose in normal saline. Hgb, Hemoglobin; IV, intravenous(ly). treatment should follow the 10 steps. Two other potentially fatal mis- takes are to treat edema with a diuretic and to give a high-protein diet in the early phase of treatment. Emergency Treatment Table 62.7 summarizes emergency treatment for malnourished children with shock and other emergency conditions. Note that treatment of shock in these children is different (less rapid, smaller volume, different fluid) from treatment of shock in well-nourished children. However, shock from dehydration and shock from sepsis often coexist and are difficult to differentiate on clinical grounds. Thus the physician must be guided by the response to treatment: children with dehydration respond to IV fluid, whereas those with septic shock will not respond. Because severely malnourished chil- dren can quickly succumb to fluid overload, they must be moni- Stabilization Table 62.8 summarizes the therapeutic directives for stabilization steps and teding frequent smal broads us a bicily Toulated amounts of F75 (a specially formulated low-lactose milk with 75 kcal and 0.9 g protein per 100 mL to which potassium, magnesium, and micronutrients are added) will reestablish metabolic control, treat edema, and restore appetite. The parenteral route should be avoided; children who lack appetite should be fed by nasogastric tube, because nutrients delivered within the gut lumen help in its repair. Table 62.10 provides recipes for preparing the spe- cial feeds and their nutrient composition. Of the two recipes for F75, one requires no cooking, and the other is cereal based and has a lower osmolality, which may benefit children with persistent diarrhea. F75 is also commercially available; maltodextrins replace some of the sugar, and potassium, magnesium, minerals, and vitamins are already added. 

Chapter 62 • Nutrition, Food Security, and Health 429 Table 62.8 Therapeutic Directives for Stabilization of Malnourished Children STEP 1. Prevent/treat hypoglycemia blood glucose <3 mmol/L. 2. Prevent/treat hypothermia axillary <35°C (95°F); rectal <35.5°C (95.9°F). 3. Prevent/treat dehydration. 4. Correct electrolyte imbalance deficit of potassium and magnesium, excess sodium. 5. Prevent/treat infections. PREVENTION TREATMENT Avoid long gaps without food and minimize need for glucose: 1. Feed immediately. 2. Feed every 3 hr day and night (2 hr if ill). 3. Feed on time. 4. Keep warm. 5. Treat infections (they compete for glucose). Note: Hypoglycemia and hypothermia often coexist and are signs of severe infection. Keep warm and dry and feed frequently. 1. Avoid exposure. 2. Dress warmly, including head, and cover with blanket. 3. Keep room hot; avoid drafts. 4. Change wet clothes and bedding. If conscious: 1. Give 10% glucose (50 mL), or a feed (see step 7), or 1 tsp sugar under tongue, whichever is quickest. 2. Feed every 2 hr for at least first day. Initially give ¼ of feed every 30 min. 3. Keep warm. 4. Start broad-spectrum antibiotics. If unconscious: 1. Immediately give sterile 10% glucose (5 mL/kg) rapidly by IV. 2. Feed every 2 hr for at least first day. Initially give ¼ of feed every 30 min. Use nasogastric (NG) tube if unable to drink. 3. Keep warm. 4. Start broad-spectrum antibiotics. Actively rewarm. 1. Feed. 2. Skin-to-skin contact with caregiver ("kangaroo technique") or dress in warmed clothes, cover head, wrap in warmed blanket, and provide indirect heat (e.g., heater; transwarmer mattress; incandescent lamp). 3. Monitor temperature hourly (or every 30 min if using heater). 4. Stop rewarming when rectal temperature is 36.5°C (97.7°F). 5. Do not bathe if very ill. 6. Feed frequently day and night. 7. Treat infections. Replace stool losses. Do not give IV fluids unless the child is in shock. 1. Give ReSoMal after each watery 1. Give ReSoMal 5 mL/kg every 30 min for first 2 hr orally or NG tube. stool. ReSoMal (37.5 mmol Na/L) is 2. Then give 5-10 mL/kg in alternate hours for up to 10 hr. Amount depends a low-sodium rehydration solution on stool loss and eagerness to drink. Feed in the other alternate hour. for malnutrition. 3. Monitor hourly and stop if signs of overload develop (pulse rate increases by 25 beats/min and respiratory rate by 5 breaths/min; increasing edema; engorged jugular veins). 4. Stop when rehydrated (≥3 signs of hydration: less thirsty, passing urine, skin pinch less slow, eyes less sunken, moist mouth, tears, less lethargic, improved pulse and respiratory rate). 1. Give extra potassium (4 mmol/kg/day) and magnesium (0.6 mmol/kg/day) for at least 2wk (see Table 62.12) Note: Potassium and magnesium are already added in Nutriset F75 and F100 packets. Minimize risk of cross-infection. 1. Avoid overcrowding. 2. Wash hands. 3. Give measles vaccine to unimmunized children age >6 mo. Infections are often silent. Starting on first day, give broad-spectrum antibiotics to all children. 1. For antibiotic choices/schedule, see Table 62.9. 2. Ensure all doses are given, and given on time. 3. Cover skin lesions so that they do not become infected. Note: Avoid steroids because they depress immune function. 6. Correct micronutrient Note: Folic acid, multivitamins, zinc, Do not give iron in the stabilization phase. deficiencies. copper, and other trace minerals are 1. Give vitamin A on day 1 (<6 mo 50,000 units; 6-12 mo 100,000 units; >12 already added in Nutriset F75 and mo 200,000 units) if child has any eye signs of vitamin A deficiency or has F100 packets. had recent measles. Repeat this dose on days 2 and 14. 2. Give folic acid, 1 mg (5 mg on day 1). 3. Give zinc (2 mg/kg/day) and copper (0.3 mg/kg/day). These are in the electrolyte/mineral solution and Combined Mineral Vitamin mix (CMV) and can be added to feeds and ReSoMal. 4. Give multivitamin syrup or CMV. 7. Start cautious feeding. 1. Give 8-12 small feeds of F75 to provide 130 mL/kg/day, 100 kcal/kg/day, and 1-1.5 g protein/kg/day. 2. If gross edema, reduce volume to 100 mL/kg/day. 3. Keep a 24-hr intake chart. Measure feeds carefully. Record leftovers. 4. If child has poor appetite, coax and encourage to finish the feed. If unfinished, reoffer later. Use NG tube if eating ≤80% of the amount offered. 5. If breastfed, encourage continued breastfeeding but also give F75. 6. Transfer to F100 when appetite returns (usually within 1 wk) and edema has been lost or is reduced. 7. Weigh daily and plot weight. 

430 Part V • Nutrition Dehydration status is easily misdiagnosed in severely wasted chil- dren, because the usual signs (e.g., slow skin pinch, sunken eyes) may be present even without dehydration. Rehydration must therefore be closely monitored for signs of fluid overload. Serum electrolyte levels can be misleading because of sodium leaking from the blood into cells and potassium leaking out of cells. Keeping the intake of electrolytes and nutrients constant (see Table 62.8) allows systems to stabilize more quickly than adjusting intake in response to laboratory results. Table 62.11 provides a recipe for the special rehydration solu- tion used in severe malnutrition (ReSoMal). Therapeutic Combined Table 62.9 Recommended Antibiotics for Malnourished Children* If no complications If complications (shock, hypoglycemia, hypothermia, skin lesions, respiratory or urinary tract infections, or lethargy/sickly) GIVE Amoxicillin, 25 mg/kg PO twice daily for 5 days Gentamicin, 7.5 mg/kg V or IM once daily for 7 days and Ampicillin, 50 mg/kg IV or IM every 8hr for 5 days If specific infections are identified, add appropriate antibiotics. For persistent diarrhea or small bowel overgrowth, add metronidazole, 7.5 mg/kg PO every 8 hr for 7 days. *Local resistance patterns may require these to be adjusted: Ensure that there is gram- PO, Orally; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously. Table 62.10 Recipes for Milk Formulas F75 and F100 Mineral Vitamin mix (CMV) contains electrolytes, minerals, and vita- mins and is added to ReSoMal and feeds. If unavailable, potassium, magnesium, zinc, and copper can be added as an electrolyte/mineral stock solution (Table 62.12 provides a recipe), and a multivitamin sup- plement can be given separately. Rehabilitation The signals for entry to the rehabilitation phase are reduced or minimal edema and return of appetite. A controlled transition over 3 days is recommended to prevent refeeding syndrome (see Chap- ter 63). After the transition, unlimited amounts should be given of a high-energy, high-protein milk formula such as F100 (100 kcal and 3 g protein per 100 mL), or a ready-to-use therapeutic food Table 62.11 Recipe for Rehydration Solution for Malnutrition (ReSoMal) INGREDIENT AMOUNT Water 2L WHO ORS One 1-L sachet* Sucrose 50 g Electrolyte/mineral solutiont 40 mL She contain: 7 odium chund, 21 isol oasisto dihydrato, 15 g potassium chloride, and 13.5 g glucose. *See Table 62.12 for recipe, or use commercially available therapeutic Combined Who OR Wid Meal Organization Oral Rehydration Solution. Dried skimmed milk (g) Sugar (g) F75B (STARTER) 25 100 Cereal flour (g) F75C (STARTER) (CEREAL-BASED) 25 70 35 F100° (CATCH-UP) 80 50 - Vegetable oil (g) Electrolyte/mineral solution (mL)a Water: make up to (mL) 30 20 1000 20 1000 20 1000 Content/100 mL Energy (kcal) Protein (g) Lactose (g) Potassium (mmol) Sodium (mmol) Magnesium (mmol) Zinc (mg) Copper (mg) % Energy from protein % Energy from fat Osmolality (mOsm/L) 75 0.9 1.3 4.0 0.6 0.43 2.0 0.25 5 32 413 75 1.1 1.3 4.2 0.6 0.46 2.0 0.25 6 32 334 100 2.9 4.2 6.3 1.9 0.73 2.3 0.25 12 53 419 Whisk at high speed to prevent oil from separating out. •See Table 62.12 for recipe, or use commercially available therapeutic Combined Mineral Vitamin mix (CMV). bA comparable F75 can be made from 35 g dried whole milk, 100 g sugar, 20 g oil, 20 mL electrolyte/mineral solution, and water to 1,000 mL or from 300 mL full-cream cow's milk, 100 g sugar, 20 g oil, 20 mL electrolyte/mineral solution, and water to 1,000 mL. -This lower-osmolality formula may be helpful for children with dysentery or persistent diarrhea. Cook for 4 min. JA comparable F100 can be made from 110 g dried whole milk, 50 g sugar, 30 g oil, 20 mL electrolyte/mineral solution, and water to 1000 mL or from 880 mL full-cream cow's milk, 75 g sugar, 20 g oil, 20 mL electrolyte/mineral solution, and water to 1,000 mL. 

Table 62.12 Recipe for Concentrated Electrolyte/Mineral Solution* INGREDIENT Potassium chloride: KCI Tripotassium citrate Magnesium chloride: MgC 6H20 Zinc acetate: Zn acetate•2H,O Copper (cupric) sulfate: CuSO4•5H20 Water: make up to g 224.0 81.0 76.0 8.2 1.4 2500 mL Add 20mL when preparing 1 L of feed or ReSoMal. *Make fresh each month. Use cooled boiled water. mol/20 mL 24 mmol 2mmol 3mmoll 300 umol 45 umol Chapter 63 • Refeeding Syndrome 431 Figure 62.8 shows the criteria for inpatient and outpatient care. To maximize coverage and compliance, community-based therapeutic care has 4 main elements: community mobilization and sensitization, active case finding, therapeutic care, and follow-up after discharge. Community-based therapeutic care comprises steps 8-10 (see Fig. 62.7), plus a broad-spectrum antibiotic (step 5). RUTF is usually pro- vided, especially in times of food shortage. RUTF is specially designed for rehabilitating children with severe acute malnutrition at home. It is high in energy and protein and has electrolytes and micronutrients added. The most widely used RUTF is a thick paste that contains milk powder, peanuts, vegetable oil, and sugar. Pathogens cannot grow in it because of its low moisture content. Hospitalized children who have completed steps 1-7 can be transferred to community-based care for completion of their rehabilitation, thereby reducing their hospital stay to about 7-10 days. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Severe acute malnutrition With complications Without complications Severe edema (+++) OR MUAC <115 mm AND any of the following: Anorexia Clinically unwell Not alert Edema (+/++) OR MUAC <115 mm AND All of the following: Good appetite Clinically well Alert Inpatient care Outpatient therapeutic care Fig. 62.8 Flow diagram for inpatient care (left) and outpatient care (right) in the child with severe acute malnutrition. MUAC, Mid-upper arm circumference. (RUTF), or family foods modified to have comparable energy and protein contents. To make the transition, for 2 days replace F75 with an equal vol- ume of F100, then increase each successive feed by 10 mL until some feed remains uneaten (usually at about 200 mL/kg/day). After this transition, give 150-220 kcal/kg/day and 4-6 g protein/kg/day and continue to give potassium, magnesium, and micronutrients. Add iron (3 mg/kg/day). If breastfed, encourage continued breastfeed- ing. Children with severe malnutrition have developmental delays, so loving care, structured play, and sensory stimulation during and after treatment are essential to aid recovery of brain function. Community-Based Treatment Many children with severe acute malnutrition can be identified in their communities before medical complications arise. If these children have a good appetite and are clinically well, they can be rehabilitated at home through community-based management of acute malnutrition, which has the added benefit of reducing their exposure to nosocomial infec- tions and providing continuity of care after recovery. It also reduces the time caregivers spend away from home and their opportunity costs and can be cost-effective for health services. Chapter 63 Refeeding Syndrome Jason M. Nagata and Andrea K. Garber Refeeding syndrome occurs in response to reintroduction of nutri- tion in the malnourished patient. Rapid electrolyte and fluid shifts in response to the surge of insulin brought on by the presence of nutrients can lead to numerous medical complications shown in Table 63.1 and may progress to life-threatening outcomes, includ- ing coma, heart failure, and sudden death. Early accounts of the syndrome were among starved survivors of wartime sieges and con- centration camps and among prisoners of war when given sudden access to unlimited food. Refeeding syndrome occurs as a result of oral, enteral, or parenteral (highest risk) feeding of malnour- ished individuals, especially in the setting of aggressive refeed- ing. Patient populations at risk for refeeding syndrome include those with anorexia nervosa and other restrictive eating disorders, chronic conditions causing malnutrition (cancer, congenital heart disease), malabsorptive syndromes (inflammatory bowel disease, cystic fibrosis), cerebral palsy, bariatric surgery, and bowel resec- tions (Table 63.2). In malnourished patients with anorexia nervosa, cases of refeeding syndrome have been documented during refeeding. Risk is greatest within the first 7 days of the start of feeding and is primarily indi- cated by serum hypophosphatemia (<3.0 ng/dL); hypokalemia (<3.5 mmol/L) and hypomagnesemia (<1.8 mg/đL) are also seen. Studies have identified low weight, but not the caloric load, as the primary risk factor for refeeding syndrome. An increase in the supply of energy (usually carbohydrates) is accompanied by an increase in sodium pump activity, and too sudden a supply risks causing a rapid release of accumulated sodium from cells, causing expansion of extracellular and plasma volumes. At the same time, there is increased cellular uptake of glucose, potassium, magnesium, and phosphate. Reactivation of metabolic pathways for adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production further depletes serum phosphorus. For decades, the key to preventing the syndrome was believed to be lower-calorie refeeding with cautious advancement. Diets start- ing at 1,000-1,200 calories per day were recommended by multiple organizations in the United States. Diets as low as 500 calories per day were recommended in Europe. These cautious approaches are still recommended for patients with extreme malnutrition (<60% of median body mass index for age and sex) and children in developing 

432 Part V • Nutrition Table 63.1 Clinical Signs and Symptoms of Refeeding Syndrome HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA Cardiac Hypotension Decreased stroke volume Respiratory Impaired diaphragm contractility Dyspnea Respiratory failure Neurologic Paresthesia Weakness Confusion Disorientation Lethargy Areflexic paralysis Seizures HYPOKALEMIA Cardiac Arrhythmias Respiratory Failure Neurologic Weakness Paralysis Gastrointestinal Nausea Vomiting Constipation Muscular Rhabdomyolysis Muscle necrosis Other Death Coma HYPOMAGNESEMIA Cardiac Arrhythmias Neurologic Weakness Tremor Tetany Seizures Altered mental status Coma Gastrointestinal Nausea Vomiting Diarrhea Other Refractory hypokalemia and hypocalcemia Death VITAMIN/THIAMINE DEFICIENCY Encephalopathy Lactic acidosis Death SODIUM RETENTION Fluid overload Pulmonary edema Cardiac compromise HYPERGLYCEMIA Cardiac Hypotension Respiratory Hypercapnia Failure Other Ketoacidosis Coma Dada immune Hematologic Leukocyte dysfunction Hemolysis Thrombocytopenia Other Death Data from Kraft MD, Btaiche IF, Sacks GS. Review of RFS. Nutr Clin Pract. 2005;20:625-633. From Fuentebella J, Kerner JA. Refeeding syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2009;56:1201-1210. Table 63.2 Refeeding Syndrome: National Institutes for Clinical Excellence (NICE) Guidelines for Management of Refeeding Syndrome PATIENTS AT RISK FOR REFEEDING SYNDROME ONE OR MORE OF THE -OR— TWO OR MORE OF THE FOLLOWING FOLLOWING • BMI <16 kg/m2 • BMI <18.5 kg/m? • Unintentional weight loss of • Unintentional weight loss of >15% in the previous 3-6 mo >10% in the previous 3-6 mo • Little or no nutritional intake • Little or no nutritional intake for >10 days for >5 days • Low levels of potassium, • History of alcohol or drug use, phosphorus, or magnesium including insulin, chemotherapy, before refeeding antacids, or diuretics From Sachs K, Andersen D, Sommer J, Winkelman A, Mehler PS. Avoiding medical complications during the refeeding of patients with anorexia nervosa. Eat Disord. 2015;23(5):411-421, Table 1, p. 414. nations, where the World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for the treatment of malnutrition are still in place (see Chapter 62). However, the majority of patients hospitalized in the United States are adolescents with acute, moderate malnutrition. In this patient population, studies have demonstrated the feasibility of higher- calorie refeeding beginning >1,400 calories per day. A randomized clinical trial has demonstrated the efficacy and safety of starting with 2,000 calories per day in hospitalized adolescents with mod- erate malnutrition secondary to anorexia nervosa. In the United States, meal-based refeeding is most common, with food served on bedside trays, whereas higher-calorie refeeding by nasogastric tube is reported in Australia. Electrolyte shifts are much lower than expected using these protocols; serum electrolyte levels can be monitored daily in hospital settings and decreased electrolyte levels may be corrected with supplementation. The following guidance is a suggestion for possible electrolyte repletion for refeeding syndrome in adolescents with eating disor- ders. For hypophosphatemia: Phos-Na-K 1 packet (250 mg) tid for phosphorous 2.5-2.9 mg/dL; Phos-Na-K 2 packets (500 mg) tid for phosphorous 2.0-2.4 mg/dL; IV Na-K-Phos 0.24 mmol/kg max 15 mmol/dose, and consider intensive care consultation for phospho- rous <2.0 mg/dL. For hypokalemia: extended release KCI 20 mEq PO for potassium 3.1-3.4 mmol/L (recheck in 8-12 hours); extended release KCI 40 mEq PO for potassium 2.5-3.0 mmol/L (recheck in 8-12 hours); extended release KCI 40 mEq PO stat for potassium 2.2-2.4 mmol/L; and IV KCl and consider intensive care consulta- tion for potassium <2.2 mmol/L. For hypomagnesemia: Mag-oxide 1 tablet (133-200 mg elemental Mg each) bid for magnesium 1.3-1.7 mg/dL; Mag-oxide 2 tablets (133-200 mg elemental Mg each) bid for magnesium 1.0-1.2 mg/dL; and IV Mg-SO4 @50 mg/kg; max 2 g/ dose and consider intensive care consultation for magnesium <1.0 mg/dL. Declining electrolytes but within the normal range gener- ally do not need to be treated. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Chapter 64 Malnutrition in High-Resource Settings Liliane K. Diab, Stephanie P. Gilley, and Nancy F. Krebs See Chapter 62 for malnutrition in low- and middle-income coun tries. Malnutrition refers to undernutrition and is defined as an imbalance between nutrient requirements and intake or delivery that then results in deficits-of energy, protein, or micronutrients— that negatively affect growth and development. Malnutrition may be illness related or nonillness related, or both. Illness-related malnu- trition may be caused by one or more diseases, infections, or con- genital anomalies and by injury or surgery. Nonillness-related causes include environmental, psychosocial, or behavioral factors. Often, one cause may be primary and exacerbated by another. Patients with malnutrition may present with growth deceleration, or actual weight loss, as measured by anthropometric parameters, including weight, length/height, skinfolds, and mid-upper arm circumference (see Chapter 62). Wasting is defined as being too thin for height (weight for length or body mass index [BMI] z score less than -2). Stunting is defined as being too short for age (height or length z score less than -2). U.S. data suggest 10% of children seen by primary care physicians are diagnosed with growth faltering. Malnutrition is a primary diagno- sis in 1-5% of all hospital admissions. The prevalence of malnutrition in hospitalized patients is ~25%; malnutrition in children can contrib- ute to poor outcomes, especially in intensive care units. Although failure to thrive (FTT) has classically been the term used to describe children who are not meeting weight gain targets based on growth curves, the term malnutrition more accurately describes this cohort of children and removes perceived accusations or blame from the diagnosis. Chapter 64 • Malnutrition in High-Resource Settings 433 CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS The degree of malnutrition can be assessed by inadequate weight- for-corrected age, failure to gain adequate weight over time (weight gain velocity), height velocity, weight-for-length or BMI depend- ing on age, and developmental outcomes (see Chapter 62). These growth and anthropometric parameters are measured longitudi- nally and plotted on growth charts appropriate for the child's sex, age (corrected if premature), and, if known, genetic disorders, such as trisomy 21 or Turner syndrome. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Pre- vention (CDC) recommend the 2006 World Health Organization (WHO) standards for infants up to 2 years of age who are measured supine for length. The CDC 2000 growth references are recom- mended for children and adolescents (age 2-20 years) when mea- sured with a standing height. The severity of malnutrition (mild, moderate, or severe) may be determined by plotting the z score (standard deviation [SD] from the mean) for each of these anthro- pometric values on the age- and sex-appropriate growth chart (Table 64.1). Most electronic health records are able to calculate and plot the z scores for measured anthropometrics. Z scores can also be obtained by entering measurements in electronic applications such as peditools.org. In infants less than 6 months old, a slow or slowing weight gain velocity can indicate malnutrition even if weight/length is preserved. The presence of bilateral pitting edema and low albu- min triggers concern for edematous malnutrition (kwashiorkor) in the absence of an alternative explanation (such as heart, liver, or renal disease). Edema in the setting of malnutrition automatically classifies as severe malnutrition (see Table 64.1). ETIOLOGY AND DIAGNOSIS The most common mechanisms of pediatric malnutrition are nonillness related and are secondary to insufficient calorie intake, whether the result of low maternal breast milk supply, psychosocial factors such as food insecurity, or feeding difficulties. Picky eat- ing, although common in young children, can occasionally be so restrictive as to result in malnutrition and/or micronutrient defi- ciencies. Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder is one risk fac- tor and is often seen in children with autism, food aversions, or those on elimination diets for fear of food allergies or gluten sen- sitivity (Fig. 61.3) (Table 64.2). The most important illness-related Table 64.1 Comprehensive Malnutrition Indicators INDICATORS* Weight-for-length z score BMI-for-age z score Length z score Mid-upper arm circumference †Weight gain velocity (<2 years of age) †Weight loss (2-20yr of age) †Deceleration in weight-for- length/height or BMI-for-age Inadequate nutrient intake ^Edema SEVERE MALNUTRITION ≤-3 ≤-3 ≤-3 ≤-3 <75% of the norm for expected weight gain >10% of UBW Deceleration across 3 z score lines MODERATE MALNUTRITION -2.0 to -2.99 -2.0 to -2.99 No data -2.0 to -2.99 <50% of the norm for expected weight gain >7.5% UBW Deceleration across 2 z score lines ≤25% of estimated energy/protein 26-50% of estimated energy/ need protein need Present Absent MILD MALNUTRITION -1.0 to -1.99t -1.0 to -1.99t No data -1.0 to -1.99 <25% of the norm for expected weight gain >5% UBW Deceleration across 1 z score line 51-75% of estimated energy/ protein need Absent Use clinical judgment when applying these diagnostic criteria. *It is recommended that when a child meets more than one malnutrition acuity level, the highest acuity level is used for diagnosis to ensure that appropriate evaluation, monitoring, and treatment are provided. ^The presence of bilateral pitting edema and low albumin is diagnostic for kwashiorkor, which is severe malnutrition regardless of any other indicator(s). *Needs additional positive diagnostic criteria to make a malnutrition diagnosis. BMI, Body mass index; UBW, usual body weight. Adapted with modifications from Becker PJ, Nieman Carney L, Corkins MR, et al. Consensus statement of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics/American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition: indicators recommended for the identification and documentation of pediatric malnutrition (undernutrition). J Acad Nutr Diet. 2014;114(12): 1988-2000. 

434 Part V • Nutrition cause of insufficient growth is inability to consume sufficient calo- ries or starvation. The differential diagnosis in this case is broad and includes many health conditions such as cardiac and neuro- logic diseases. Oral aversion can sometimes be a manifestation of eosinophilic esophagitis or dysphagia. Other causes of malnutrition are (1) increased nutrient losses (e.g., protein-losing enteropathy, chronic diarrhea); (2) increased metabolic demands, as seen in Table 64.2 DSM-5 Diagnosis of Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder A. An eating or feeding disturbance (e.g., apparent lack of interest in eating or tood; avoidance based on the sensory characteristics of food; concern about aversive consequences of eating) as manifested by persistent failure to meet appropriate nutritional and/or energy needs associated with one (or more) of the 1. Significant weight loss (or failure to achieve expected weight gain or faltering growth in children). 2. Significant nutritional deficiency. 3. Dependence on enteral feeding or oral nutritional supplements. 4. Marked interference with psychosocial functioning. B. The disturbance is not better explained by lack of available food or by associated culturally sanctioned practice. C. The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa, and there is no evidence of a disturbance in the way in which one's body weight D. The eating disturbance is not attributable to a concurrent medical condition or not better explained by another mental disorder. When the eating disturbance occurs in the context of another condition or disorder, the severity of the eating disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with the condition or disorder and warrants additional clinical attention. From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p. 947. Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association. ANTHROPOMETRY ETIOLOGY & CHRONICITY MECHANISM STARVATION NON-ILLNESS RELATED Anorexia, socio- Parameters Behavioral, socioeconomic economic, iatrogenic or environmental feeding Weight, height interruptions, or or length, skin intolerance folds, mid OR upper arm circumference. ILLNESS RELATED MALABSORPTION Statistic Z-scores ACUTE (<3 months) e.g.: Infection, trauma, burns NUTRIENT LOSS Reference charts WHO MGRS (0-2 yr) CHRONIC (23 months) e.g.: Cystic fibrosis, chronic lung disease, cancer HYPERMETABOLISM & Energy expenditure +1- CDC 2000 (2-20 уг) Altered utilization of nutrients INFLAMMATION extensive burn injuries, congenital heart disease, and thyroid disor- ders; (3) altered nutrient digestion, absorption, or utilization (e.g., cystic fibrosis, short bowel syndrome, celiac disease); and (4) some chromosome abnormalities that can be associated with poor growth such as Russel Silver syndrome. More than one mechanism can exist simultaneously (Fig. 64.1). Chronic malnutrition is defined as mal- nutrition having a duration of ≥3 months (see Chapter 62). A complete history includes information regarding the onset of the growth faltering, a detailed review of systems, past medical his- tory, and family history including parents' heights and growth pat- terns. The perinatal history is also important to identify children who are born small for gestational age (SGA). SGA infants who are asymmetric (birthweight is disproportionally more depressed than length or head circumference) have a better prognosis for catch-up growth than do infants who have symmetric intrauterine growth restriction. A detailed nutritional history should include unusual nutritional beliefs and the quantity, quality, and frequency of meals. A comprehensive physical examination can help elucidate possible underlying etiologies and manifestations of micronutrient deficien- cies to guide laboratory or imaging evaluation if indicated (Table 64.3 and see Table 62.6). Tanner staging cannot be used as a marker for nutritional status, but it is influenced and often delayed by mal- nourishment. Puberty will usually resume progression when the malnourished state improves. A reasonable initial screen should include a complete blood count, a comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP), and urinalysis. Additional measurements that are useful for classifying the severity of malnutrition and following the progress of the acutely malnourished child are mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) and triceps skin folds (TSF). MUAC can be used as an indepen- dent anthropometric tool to screen for and diagnose malnutrition (depletion of subcutaneous fat stores) when obtaining an accurate length or height is difficult. The MUAC is used as a predictor of malnutrition-related mortality by the WHO (increased risk of death from malnutrition if less than 11.5 cm in infants and children 6-64 IMBALANCE OF NUTRIENTS OUTCOMES T NUTRIENT REQUIREMENT I INTAKE MALNUTRITION INTAKE < REQUIREMENT ENERGY +/-PROTEIN IMBALANCE MICRONUTRIENT DEFICIENCIES LOSS OF LEAN BODY MASS MUSCLE WEAKNESS → DORMENTA DELAY INFECTIONS MMUNE DYSFUNCTION DELAYED WOUND HEALING PROLONGED HOSPITAL STAY Fig. 64.1 Defining malnutrition in hospitalized children (ASPEN). CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; MGRS, Multicenter Growth Reference Study; WHO, World Health Organization. (From Mehta NM, Corkins MR, Lyman B, et al. Defining pediatric malnutrition: A paradigm shift toward etiology-related definitions. J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2013;37(4]:460-481.) 

Table 64.3 CAUSE Psychosocial CNS Gastrointestinal Chapter 64 • Malnutrition in High-Resource Settings 435 Approach to Malnutrition Based on Review of Systems HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION Lack of structure, poor sleep, permissive or intrusive feeding, feeding difficulties and food refusal starting in infancy DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATION Low caloric intake secondary to home teeding environment; in extreme cases need to consider child neglect or abuse WORKUP May need blood tests to check for certain micronutrient deficiencies based on diet history Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID) Developmental delay, poor feeding, Brain tumor, intracranial bleeding vomiting, large head circumference, (consider child abuse) abnormal neurologic exam Chronic vomiting or diarrhea, fatty stool, crying with feedings, nocturnal cough, snoring, history of travel to/from developing countries Malabsorption, intestinal parasites, milk protein intolerance, pancreatic insufficiency, cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, immunodeficiency, inflammatory bowel disease, small bowel bacterial overgrowth Congenital heart disease, heart failure Referral to developmental pediatrics or neurology, MRI, EEG, specific test for neuromuscular function May need referral to gastring srolstay, stool studies small our stronow-trol may need endoscopic evaluation Referral to cardiology, ECG, echocardiogram Noonan syndrome, William syndrome, Specific genetic testing Turner syndrome, Russel Silver syndrome Asthma, aspiration, food allergies, netic fibrosis, i hyperplefied infancy UTI, renal tubular acidosis Cardiac Genetic Pulmonary Slow feeding, dyspnea, diaphoresis with feeding, restless sleep, heat murmur May have a positive family history of developmental delay; often facies typical of a syndrome, skeletal abnormalities, heart murmur; consider in symmetric IUGR. Dyspnea, tachypnea, recurrent wheezing, pulmonary infections Chest x-ray, sweat chloride test; specialty referral Renal History of recurrent UTI, abnormal urinalysis, elevated BUN and creatinine General chemistry with BUN and creatinine, urinalysis, urine and serum osmolality Endocrine Hypothyroidism is associated with Hypothyroidism, type 1 diabetes, Thyroid function tests, blood decreased activity level; diabetes is growth hormone deficiency associated with polyuria and polydipsia; gluction test urinalysis, pituitary growth hormone deficiency is associated with decreased linear growth velocity BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; CNS, central nervous system; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; EEG, electroencephalogram; IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; UTI, urinary tract infection. Adapted from Carrasco MM, Wolford JE. Child abuse and neglect. In Zitelli BJ, Mcintire SC, Nowalk AJ, eds. At/as of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, Table 6.6. months of age). TSF is a measure of subcutaneous fat and is a sen- sitive indicator of total body fat. Both MUAC and TSF are espe- cially useful tools for nutrition status assessment in children with altered body composition such as low muscle mass due to cerebral palsy. However, TSF needs to be done by experienced providers to minimize errors. MUAC and TSF charts are available on the WHO website. of the child, the severity of malnutrition, and the underlying medi- cal condition. Every effort to maximize the breastfeeding relation- ship in breastfed infants should be made, ideally involving lactation support, expressing breast milk to increase supply if low, and forti- fication of maternal milk if indicated. Feeding style is equally important to caloric intake. Parents should be encouraged to respond to the child's cues of hunger and satiety and to have a structured schedule for meals and snacks TREATMENT (every 2-3 hours). A responsive feeding style that respects the tod- While an illness-related etiology of malnutrition is being investi- der's autonomy but retains parental control over food choices helps gated, caloric supplementation can occur simultaneously. Both establish healthy feeding habits (see Chapter 61). Grazing behaviors the medical workup and the initiation of supplemental oral feeds with frequent small snacks interfere with eating at mealtimes. Com- can occur in the outpatient setting with close follow-up. Con- monly used spill-proof and squeezable packaging foster eating "on sider including a speech or occupational therapist for a suck-and- the go" and has been associated with poor self-regulation of energy swallow evaluation if the history suggests difficulty with oral feeds. Hospitalization may be indicated for cases of severe malnutrition because of the potential for refeeding syndrome (see Chapter 63), or if a child with mild to moderate malnutrition has not responded after 2-3 months of outpatient management. Hospitalization may include initiation of nasogastric tube feeds, further diagnostic and laboratory evaluation, assessment and observed implementation of adequate nutrition, and evaluation of the parent-child feeding interaction. The type of caloric supplementation is based on the age Use of liquid oral nutritional supplements resulted in significantly better catch-up growth in children with moderate to severe mal- nutrition (Tables 64.4 and 64.5). Oral nutritional supplements are most helpful when monitored and balanced with food intake. Start with 30-40 kcal per kg per day and serve them in small amounts simultaneously with meals to allow intake of age-appropriate food. However, children with oral motor difficulties may need to con- sume a larger proportion of calories in a liquid form. 

436 Part V • Nutrition Table 64.4 Nutritional Supplements CATEGORY ORAL SUPPLEMENTS Standard, cow's milk protein Semi-elemental Elemental Soy protein Clear liquid Wound healing supplement TUBE FEEDING Standard, cow's milk protein High calorie Food-based formulas BRAND EXAMPLES FEATURES AND COMMENTS Boost Kid Essentials 1.0 or 1.5 (with or without fiber) PediaSure 1.0 or 1.5 (with or without fiber) Nutren Jr 1.0 (with or without fiber) Kate Farms Pediatric Standard 1.2 *EnfaGrow *Nido *Scandishake Kate Farms Pediatric Peptide 1.5 PediaSure Peptide 1.0 or 1.5 Peptamen Jr Ele Care Junior Neocate Splash Neocate Jr Puramino Peptamen Jr Bright Beginnings Soy Pediasmart Soy *Boost Breeze *Ensure Clear May or may not contain lactose. Used for malabsorption. Contains MCT. Used for malabsorption or severe protein allergy. Contains MCT. Cow-milk protein free. Juven Arginaid Clear liquid, fruit flavored, fat free; cow's milk protein source. For supplemental nutrition only; none are a complete nutrition supplement. Arginaid: L-Arginine only. Juven: Arginine glutamine, and betahydroxy-betamethylbutyrate. Boost Kid Essentials 1.0, 1.5 Nutren Junior PediaSure 1.0 Boost Kid Essentials 1.5 (1.5 kcal/mL) PediaSure 1.5 (1.5 kcal/mL) Kate Farms Pediatric Peptide 1.5 (1.5 kcal/mL) Compleat Pediatric (1.0 kcal/mL) Complet Pediatric Reduced Calorie (0.6 kcal/mL) Compleat Pediatric Organic Blends (1.2 kcal/mL) PediaSure Harvest (1.0 kcal/mL) Kate Farms Pediatric Standard (1.2 kcal/mL) Nourish (1.13 kcal/mL) Isotonic, most available with or without additional fiber. For increased caloric needs or fluid restriction. List of products is not exhaustive and does not imply endorsement. Pediatric formulas are appropriate for children ages 1-11 years and are not appropriate for use in infants. After 11 years, adult formulations (not listed) may be used. *Does not provide complete sole source of nutrition. Adapted from Pediatric Nutrition Handbook/internal guide at Children's Hospital Colorado. The response to feeding depends on the specific diagnosis, medi- cal treatment, and severity of malnutrition. The same anthropomet- ric measures used to diagnose malnutrition can be used to measure progress and recovery from the malnourished state. Target recovery growth is 150% of the normal rate of weight gain for age (Table 64.6). Many children with malnutrition require empiric micronu- trient supplementation with zinc (and thiamine, if concerns about refeeding). Iron deficiency is also common in young children, but supplementation is most effective if initiated after resolution of any acute inflammatory processes (such as infection) and is typically not initiated until after 1-2 weeks of successful weight restoration. Additional supplementation for other micronutrients such as vita- min D and vitamin A can be considered based on symptoms and laboratory evaluation. Interventions for contributing psychosocial factors are ideally tar- geted to the underlying issue, such as maternal depression or insuf- ficient funds for food. Some children who develop feeding aversion behaviors will require treatment by a specialized feeding team. If abuse or purposeful neglect is a concern, the family should be referred to the child protective services team. Kwashiorkor has a specific set of treatment guidelines from the WHO, including empiric antibiotics and avoidance of intravenous fluids and rapid repletion, as this can precipitate heart failure. Treat- ment of kwashiorkor in a low-resource setting is discussed in more detail in Chapter 62. In a high-resource setting, treatment may involve continuous feeds of a semi-elemental formula through a nasogastric tube to stabilize blood sugars in conjunction with close monitoring of electrolytes. 

Chapter 64 • Malnutrition in High-Resource Settings 437 Table 64.5 CARBOHYDRATE (CHO) Cornstarch Infant rice cereal FAT MCT oil Heavy whipping cream Butter PROTEIN Beneprotein COMBINATION Duocal MCT Procal Carnation Instant Breakfast Calorie Boosters for Oral and Enteral Feeding Kcal/g Kcal/Tbsp 3.8 8.3 3.6 4.9 6.6 33 15 116 50 100 16.7 42 - FEATURES AND COMMENTS Can add to formula or water to treat hypoglycemia in glycogen storage disease or other disorders; dose per weight, age, and glucose levels; suggested starting dose of 0.5 g per kg per feed. Thickens formula, not human milk; start with 1 teaspoon rice cereal/oz formula (adds 5 kcal/oz, dilutes other nutrients). Not recommended to administer through feeding tube. 7.7 kcal/mL; does not mix well, can administer as small bolus. 3.3 kcal/mL can be added to milk or nutritional supplements. Easy to mix and use in a variety of foods. 100% whey protein; 1 packet = 1 scoop = 7 g weight, 6 g protein, 25 kcal; can add to formula, human milk, food, or beverages. Hydrolyzed corn starch and fat (35% MCT); can add to formula, human milk, food, or beverages. add to formula, food, and beverages. 1 packet (36 g) = 140 kcal Table 64.6 Weight Gain Velocity (0-2 Years of Age, g/day) AGE (MONTHS) Preterm infant 0-3 3-6 6-9 9-12 12-24 EXPECTED GROWTH (g/DAY) 30-40 20-30 15-20 10-15 10 6 CATCH-UP GROWTH (g/DAY) 30-45 20-30 15-20 15 10 PROGNOSIS Malnutrition, regardless of cause, can potentially have a detrimental effect on physical and intellectual growth and development, especially in infants younger than 2 years old. Early diagnosis and treatment of acute malnutrition may avoid long-term consequences. Multiple stud- ies point to a negative impact of chronic malnutrition and stunting on intelligence quotient (IQ) later in life. Pediatric medical providers are encouraged to approach nutritional status in children as a controllable factor that can have a profound influence on brain function throughout life. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

438 Part V • Nutrition Chapter 65 Overweight and Obesity Sheila Gahagan EPIDEMIOLOGY Obesity is an important pediatric public health problem associated with risk of complications in childhood and increased morbidity and mortality throughout adult life. Obesity is linked to more deaths than underweight. In 2016, according to the World Health Organization (WHO), 39% of adults aged 18 years and older were overweight and In the United States, child and adolescent obesity prevalence has increased by 300% over the past 40 years. In 2017-2018, the U.S. prevalence of pediatric obesity was 19.3%, affecting about 14.4 mil- lion children and adolescents. Obesity prevalence increases by age- group, with 13.4% of 2- to 5-year-olds, 20.3% of 6- to 11-year-olds, and 21.2% of 12- to 19-year-olds affected. Some U.S. populations have higher rates of childhood obesity than others do. Prevalence of obesity in children was 25.6% among Hispanic children, 24.2% among non-Hispanic Black children, 16.1% in non-Hispanic White children, and 8.7% in non-Hispanic Asian children. Higher mater- nal education confers protection against childhood obesity across all ethnic groups. The first 1,000 days, the period from conception to age 2 years, are a modifiable period related to risk for childhood obesity. Recommen- dations for the first 1,000 days include (1) a healthy and nutritious diet during pregnancy; (2) good care for all mothers during preg- nancy; (3) exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months; (4) nurturing and responsive care for infants and toddlers; (5) the right foods intro- duced to babies at the right time; (6) water and other healthy bever- ages with no added sugars for toddlers; (7) a healthy and nutritious diet for babies and toddlers; (8) the right knowledge and skills for parents and caregivers to properly nourish young children; (9) con- sistent access to enough nutritious food for families of young chil- dren; and (10) societal investments in the well-being of every baby and toddler (for further information see https://thousanddays.org/re source/nourishing-americas-future/). Parental obesity correlates with a higher risk for obesity in the children. Prenatal factors, including high preconceptual weight, ges- tational weight gain, high birthweight, and maternal smoking, are asso- ciated with increased risk for later obesity. Paradoxically, intrauterine growth restriction with early infant catch-up growth is associated with the development of central adiposity and lar (CV) risk. Breastfeeding is modestly protective for obesity based on dose and duration. Infants with high levels of negative reactivity (temperament) are more at risk for obesity than those with better self- regulation. The incidence of obesity in children was noted to increase during the COVID-19 pandemic. BODY MASS INDEX Obesity, or increased adiposity, is defined using the body mass index (BMI), an excellent proxy for more direct measurement of body fat. BMI = weight in kg/(height in meters)?. Adults with a BMI ≥30 meet the criterion for obesity, and those with a BMI 25-30 fall in the over- weight range. During childhood, levels of body fat change begin- ning with high adiposity during infancy. Body fat levels decrease for approximately 5.5 years until the period called adiposity rebound, when body fat is typically at the lowest level. Adiposity then increases until early adulthood (Fig. 65.1). Consequently, obesity and overweight are defined using BMI percentiles for children ≥2 years old and weight/ length percentiles for infants <2 years old. The criterion for obesity is BMI ≥95th percentile, and for overweight is BMI between 85th and 95th percentiles. ETIOLOGY Humans have the capacity to store energy in adipose tissue, allowing improved survival in times of famine. Simplistically, obesity results from an imbalance of caloric intake and energy expenditure. Even incremental but sustained caloric excess results in excess adiposity. Individual adiposity is the result of a complex interplay among geneti- cally determined body habitus, appetite, nutritional intake, physical activity (PA), and energy expenditure. Environmental factors deter- mine levels of available food, preferences for types of foods, levels of PA, and preferences for types of activities. Food preferences play a role in the consumption of energy-dense foods. Humans innately prefer sweet and salty foods and tend initially to reject bitter flavors, common to many vegetables. Repeated exposure to healthy foods promotes their acceptance and liking, especially in early life. This human characteristic to adapt to novel foods can be used to promote healthy food selection. Environmental Changes Over more than 4 decades, the food environment changed dramati- cally related to urbanization and the food industry as fewer families routinely prepare meals. Foods prepared by a food industry have higher levels of calories, simple carbohydrates, and fat. The price of many foods has declined relative to the family budget. These changes, in combination with marketing pressure, have resulted in larger por- tion sizes and increased snacking between meals. The increased con- sumption of high-carbohydrate beverages, including sodas, sport drinks, fruit punch, and juice, adds to these factors. According to the National Center for Health Statistics, fast food is consumed by 36.3% of 2- to 19-year-old U.S. children each day and by two thirds of children every week. A typical fast-food meal can con- tain 2,000 kcal and 84 g of fat. Many children consume four servings of high-carbohydrate beverages per day, resulting in an additional 560 kcal of low nutritional value. Sweetened beverages have been linked to increased risk for obesity. The dramatic increase in the use of high- fructose corn syrup to sweeten beverages and prepared foods is another important environmental change, leading to availability of inexpensive Since World War II, levels of PA in children and adults have declined. According to the 2017 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) survey, 26.1% of adolescents met PA guidelines of 60 minutes of PA per day. Only 20% met guidelines for aerobic PA and muscle strengthening. The persistence of low levels of PA is related to many factors, including changes in the built environment, more reli- ance on cars, lower levels of active transportation, safety issues, and increasingly sedentary lifestyles. Many sectors of society do not engage in PA during leisure time. For children, budgetary constraints and pressure for academic performance have led to less time devoted to physical education in schools. Perception of poor neighborhood safety also leads to lower levels of PA. Furthermore, screens (televisions, tab- lets, smartphones, computers) offer compelling sedentary activities that do not burn calories. Sleep plays a role in the risk for obesity. Over the past 4 decades, children and adults have decreased the amount of time spent sleep- ing. Reasons for these changes may relate to increased time at work, increased time watching television, and a generally faster pace of life. Chronic partial sleep loss can increase risk for weight gain and obesity, with the impact possibly greater in children than in adults. In stud ies of young, healthy, lean men, short sleep duration was associated with decreased leptin levels and increased ghrelin levels, along with increased hunger and appetite. Sleep debt also results in decreased glu- cose tolerance and insulin sensitivity related to alterations in gluco- corticoids and sympathetic activity. Some effects of sleep debt might relate to orexins, peptides synthesized in the lateral hypothalamus that can increase feeding, arousal, sympathetic activity, and neuropeptide Genetic determinants also have a role in individual susceptibility to obesity (Table 65.1). Findings from genome-wide association studies explain a very small portion of interindividual variability in obesity. 

Chapter 65 • Overweight and Obesity 439 NAME - 2 to 20 years: Boys Body mass index-for-age percentiles Date Age Weight Stature BMI* Comments RECORD # *To Calculate BMI: Weight (kg) ÷ Stature (cm) ÷ Stature (cm) x 10,000 or Weight (Ib) ÷ Stature (in) ÷ Stature (in) x 703 195) BMI - - 27- 90] — 26- 185 - 25 75 - 24 - 23 50] - 22 - 21 - 25) - 20 10 - 19- - 18 17 16- - 15' - 14- 13- 12- kg/m'= AGE (YEARS) 2 3 4 5 6 7 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 BMI- • 35- - 34- - 33- - 32- - 31 - - 30 — - 29- - 28- • 27- - 26 — - 25. - 24- - 23 — 22 - 211 - 20: - 19 - 18' 17 - 16 - 15 — - 14— - 13- - 12- 19 20 Published May 30, 2000 (modified 10/16/00). SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000). http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts KUDE SAFER • HEALTHIER PEOPLE™ Fig. 65.1 A, Body mass index (BMI)-for-age profiles for boys and men. 

440 Part V • Nutrition 2 to 20 years: Girls Body mass index-for-age percentiles Date Age Weight Stature BMI* Comments NAME RECORD # -951 *To Calculate BMI: Weight (kg) ÷ Stature (cm) ÷ Stature (cm) × 10,000 or Weight (Ib) ÷ Stature (in) ÷ Stature (in) × 703 -BMI 7 - 27 90 - 26- >85 - 25 - 24 -75- - 23- — 22 •50* - 21| — 20 -25 - 19 - 18 -101 17 16 15 14 13- 12- kg/m AGE (YEARS) 2 3 4 5 61 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 BMI- 35 34 33 32 - 31 - 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 - 22 21 - 20 - - 19 - 18 17 — 16 15- 141 13 12- kg/m 19 20 Published May 30, 2000 (modified 10/16/00). SOURCE: Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (2000). http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts SAFER • HEALTHIER• PEOPLE Fig. 65.1, cont'd B, BMI-for-age profiles for girls and women. Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2000. See www.cdc.gov/growthcharts. 

Table 65.1 DISEASE ENDOCRINE Cushing syndrome GH deficiency Hyperinsulinism Hypothyroidism Pseudohypoparathyroidism Endocrine and Genetic Causes of Obesity GENETIC/SYNDROMIC Albright hereditary osteodystrophy Alström syndrome Bardet-Biedl syndrome BDNF/TrkB deficiency Biemond syndrome Carpenter syndrome Cohen syndrome Deletion 9q34 Down syndrome ENPP1 gene Fragile X Fröhlich syndrome FTO gene polymorphism, plus upstream regulatory and downstream activation genes Kabuki syndrome Kleefstra syndrome KSR2 deficiency Leptin or leptin receptor gene deficiency Leptin variant (antagonistic) Melanocortin 4 receptor gene mutation МЕНМО MORM PCSK1 deficiency Prader-Willi syndrome Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiency Rapid-onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, and autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD); ROHHADNET (with neuroendocrine tumor) Rubinstein-Taylor syndrome SH2B1 deficiency SIM1 deficiency (Prader-Willi-like) Smith-Magenis syndrome TUB deficiency Turner syndrome SYMPTOMS LABORATORY Central obesity, hirsutism, moon face, hypertension Dexamethasone suppression test Short stature, slow linear growth Evoked GH response, IGF-1 Nesidioblastosis, pancreatic adenoma, hypoglycemia, Mauriac syndrome Insulin level Short stature, weight gain, fatigue, constipation, cold intolerance, myxedema TSH, FTA Short metacarpals, subcutaneous calcifications, dysmorphic facies, Urine CAMP after synthetic PTH intellectual disability, short stature, hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia infusion Short stature, skeletal defects, PTH resistance GNAS gene, in syndromic but also in isolated nonsyndromic obesity ALMS1 gene Cognitive impairment, retinitis pigmentosa, insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, hearing loss, hypogonadism, cardiomyopathy Retinitis pigmentosa, renal abnormalities, polydactyly, syndactyly, hypogonadism Hyperactivity, impaired concentration, limited attention span, impaired short-term memory and pain sensation Cognitive impairment, iris coloboma, hypogonadism, polydactyly Polydactyly, syndactyly, cranial synostosis, intellectual disability -21 different genes BDNF/TrkB gene Mid-childhood-onset obesity, short stature, prominent maxillary incisors, hypotonia, intellectual disability, microcephaly, decreased visual activity, neutropenia, joint laxity Early-onset obesity, intellectual disability, brachycephaly, synophrys, prognathism, behavior and sleep disturbances Short stature, dysmorphic facies, intellectual disability Insulin resistance, childhood obesity Long facies, large, prominent ears, macroorchidism, autism Hypothalamic tumor Dysregulation of orexigenic hormone acyl-ghrelin, poor postprandial appetite suppression RAB23 gene, located on chromosome 6 in humans VPS13B gene (often called COH1) at locus 8q22 Deletion 9q34 Trisomy 21 Gene on chromosome 6q FMR1; CGG repeat expansion >200 Homozygous for FTO AA allele Characteristic facies, intellectual disability, visceral and skeletal malformations Intellectual disability, autism-like behavior, hypotonia, cardiac defects Mild hyperphagia and reduced basal metabolic rate, insulin resistance often with acanthosis nigricans, irregular menses, early development of type 2 diabetes mellitus Early-onset severe obesity, infertility (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism), hyperphagia, infections Hyperphagia, obesity; treatment with high dose recombinant leptin Early-onset severe obesity, increased linear growth, hyperphagia, hyperinsulinemia; most common known genetic cause of obesity; homozygous worse than heterozygous Intellectual disability, epilepsy, hypogonadism, microcephaly, obesity Intellectual disability, obesity, retinal dystrophy, micropenis Small bowel enteropathy, hypoglycemia, hypothyroidism, ACTH deficiency, diabetes insipidus Neonatal hypotonia, slow infant growth, small hands and feet, intellectual disability, hypogonadism, hyperphagia leading to severe obesity, paradoxically elevated ghrelin KMT2D, MLL2, ALR, KABUK1 EHMT1 KSR2 gene Leptin High leptin levels MC4R variant Хр22.13-p21.1 INPPSE PCSK1 gene Partial deletion of chromosome 15 or loss of paternally expressed genes: MKRN3, ZNF127, MAGELZ, SNRPN Obesity, red hair, pale skin, adrenal insufficiency due to ACTH deficiency, Loss-of-function of POMC gene hyperproinsulinemia, hyperphagia, cholestatic jaundice Often confused with congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS); presentation ≥1.5 yr with weight gain, hyperphagia, Unknown genes May be a paraneoplastic disorder hypoventilation, cardiac arrest, central diabetes insipidus, hypothyroidism, GH deficiency, pain insensitivity, hypothermia, precocious puberty, and neural crest tumors Short stature, visual impairment, scoliosis, dysmorphic facies CREBBP, EP300 Hyperphagia, disproportionate hyperinsulinemia, early speech and language SH2B1 gene delay that often resolves, behavioral problems including aggression Hyperphagia with autonomic dysfunction (characterized by low systolic SIM1gene blood pressure), speech and language delay, neurobehavioral abnormalities including autistic-type behaviors Intellectual disability, delayed speech, facial dysmorphology Retinal dystrophy, deafness Ovarian dysgenesis, lymphedema, web neck, short stature, cognitive RAI1 TUB gene XO chromosome WAGRO Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, mental retardation, obesity BDNF ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; FT,, free thyroxine; GH, growth hormone; IGF, insulin-like growth factor; PTH, parathyroid hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone. 

442 Part V • Nutrition One important example, the FTO gene at 16q12, is associated with adi- posity in childhood, probably explained by increased energy intake Monogenic forms of obesity have also been identified, including mel- anocortin-4 receptor (MCAR) deficiency, associated with early-onset obesity and food-seeking behavior. Pathogenic variants in MCAR are a common cause of monogenetic obesity but a rare (0.1%) cause of obesity in general. Deficient activation of MC4R is also seen in patients with proopiomelanocortin (POMC) deficiency, a prohormone pre- cursor of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and melanocyte- stimulating hormone (MSH), resulting in adrenal insufficiency, light skin, red hair, hyperphagia, and obesity. Leptin releases MSH, which can then activate MCAR, affecting appetite. In addition, evidence suggests that appetitive traits are moderately heritable. Some genes associated with appetite also relate to weight, and vice-versa. In addition, there are genetic conditions associated with obesity, such as Prader-Willi syndrome, which results from absence of paternally expressed imprinted genes in the 15q11.2-q13 region. Prader-Willi syndrome is characterized by insatiable appetite and food seeking. In the era of genomic medicine, it will be increasingly pos- sible to identify risks according to specific genes and consider gene- environment interactions. Epigenetic environmental modification of genes may have a role in the development of obesity, especially during fetal and early life. Endocrine and Neural Physiology Monitoring of "stored fuels" and short-term control of food intake (appetite and satiety) occurs through neuroendocrine feedback loops linking adipose tissue, the GI tract, and the CNS (Figs. 65.2 and 65.3). GI hormones, including cholecystokinin, glucagon-like peptide 1, pep- tide YY (PYY), and vagal neuronal feedback, promote satiety. Ghrelin stimulates appetite. Adipose tissue provides feedback regarding energy storage levels to the brain through hormonal release of adiponectin and leptin. These hormones act on the arcuate nucleus in the hypothalamus and on the solitary tract nucleus in the brainstem and in turn activate distinct neuronal networks. Adipocytes secrete adiponectin into the blood, with reduced levels in response to obesity and increased levels in response to fasting. Reduced adiponectin levels are associated with lower insulin sensitivity and adverse CV outcomes. Leptin is directly involved in satiety; low leptin levels stimulate food intake, and high leptin levels inhibit hunger in animal models and in healthy human volunteers. However, the negative feedback loop from leptin to appetite may be more adapted to preventing starvation than excess intake. Numerous neuropeptides in the brain, including PYY agouti-related peptide, and orexin, appear to affect appetite stimulation, whereas melanocortins and a-melanocortin-stimulating hormone are involved in satiety (see Fig. 65.3). The neuroendocrine control of appetite and weight involves a negative feedback system, balanced between short- term control of appetite and long-term control of adiposity (including leptin). PYY reduces food intake via the vagal-brainstem-hypothalamic pathway. Developmental changes in PYY are evident, as infants have higher PYY levels than school-aged children and adults. Obese chil- dren have lower fasting levels of PYY than adults. Weight loss may restore PYY levels in children, even though this does not happen in adults. In addition, patients homozygous for the FTO obesity-risk allele demonstrate poor regulation of the orexigenic hormone acyl-ghrelin and have poor postprandial appetite suppression. Complications of pediatric obesity occur during childhood and adoles- cence and persist into adulthood. An important reason to prevent and treat pediatric obesity is the increased risk for morbidity and mortality later in life. Males who are overweight during adolescence are twice as likely to die from CV disease as those who have normal weight. More immediate comorbidities include type 2 diabetes, hypertension, hyper- lipidemia, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) (Table 65.2). Insulin resistance increases with increasing adiposity and indepen- dently affects lipid metabolism and CV health. Metabolic syndrome (central obesity, hypertension, glucose intolerance, and hyperlipid- emia) increases the risk for CV morbidity and mortality. NAFLD has been reported in 34% of patients treated in a pediatric obesity clinic. NAFLD is the most common chronic liver disease in U.S. children and adolescents. It can present with advanced fibrosis or nonalcoholic ste- atohepatitis and may result in cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Insulin resistance is often associated. NAFLD is also independently associated with increased risk of CV disease. Obesity may also be associated with chronic inflammation. Adipo- nectin, a peptide with antiinflammatory properties, occurs in reduced levels in obese patients compared with insulin-sensitive, lean persons. Low adiponectin levels correlate with elevated levels of free fatty acids and plasma triglycerides in addition to a high BMI, and high adiponec- tin levels correlate with peripheral insulin sensitivity. Adipocytes secrete peptides and cytokines into the circulation, and proinflammatory pep- tides such interleukin (IL)-6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a occur in higher levels in obese patients. Specifically, IL-6 stimulates production of CRP in the liver. CRP is a marker of inflammation and might link obesity, coronary disease, and subclinical inflammation. Some complications of obesity are mechanical, including obstructive sleep apnea and orthopedic complications. Orthopedic complications include Blount disease and slipped femoral capital epiphysis (see Chap- ters 718 and 719.4). Mental health problems can coexist with obesity, with the possibil- ity of bidirectional effects. These associations are modified by gender, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. Self-esteem may be lower in obese adolescent females than in nonobese peers. Some studies have found an association between obesity and adolescent depression. There is considerable interest in the co-occurrence of eating disorders and obe- sity. Obese youth are also at risk for bullying. IDENTIFICATION Overweight and obese children are often identified as part of routine medical care. The child and family may be unaware that the child has increased adiposity. They may be unhappy with the medical provider for raising this issue and may respond with denial or apparent lack of concern. It is often necessary to begin by helping the family understand the importance of healthy weight for current and future health. Forging a good therapeutic relationship is important because obesity interven- tion requires a chronic disease management approach. Intervention and successful resolution of this problem require considerable effort by the family and the child over an extended period in order to change eating and activity behaviors. EVALUATION The evaluation of the overweight or obese child begins with exami- nation of the growth chart for weight, height, and BMI trajectories; consideration of possible medical causes of obesity; and detailed explo- ration of family eating, nutritional, and activity patterns. A complete pediatric history is used to uncover comorbid disorders. The family history focuses on the adiposity of other family members and the fam- ily history of obesity-associated disorders. The physical examination adds data that can lead to important diagnoses. Laboratory testing is guided by the need to identify comorbidities. Examination of the growth chart reveals the severity, duration, and timing of obesity onset. Children who are overweight (BMI in 85th- 95th percentile) are less likely to have developed comorbid conditions than those who are obese (BMI ≥95th percentile). Those with a BMI ≥99th percentile are most likely to have coexisting medical problems. Once obesity severity is determined, the BMI trajectory is examined to elucidate when the child became obese. Several periods during child- hood are considered sensitive periods, or times of increased risk for developing obesity, including infancy, adiposity rebound (when body fat is lowest at approximately age 5.5 years), and adolescence. An abrupt change in BMI might signal the onset of a medical problem or a period of family or personal stress for the child. Examination of the weight trajectory can further reveal how the problem developed. A young child might exhibit high weight and high height because lin- ear growth can increase early in childhood if a child consumes excess energy. At some point the weight percentile exceeds the height percen- tile, and the child's BMI climbs into the obese range. Another example 

Chapter 65 • Overweight and Obesity 443 Behavioral Outputs Hypothalamus Autonomic Outputs Brainstem Pituitary Metabolic Regulation Leptin Autonomic Afferents Endocrine Outputs Fat Insulin Ghrelin PYY ССК GLP-1 Bombesin Nutrients Autonomic Outputs Autonomic Outputs Stomach Pancreas Liver Nutrients Fig. 65.2 Regulation of energy homeo- stasis by the brain-gut-adipose axis. CCK, Cholecystokinin; GLP-1, glucagon-like peptide 1; PYY, peptide VY. (From Melmed ogy, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016, p. 1610.) is a child whose weight rapidly increases when they reduce their activ- ity level and consume more meals away from home. Examination of the height trajectory can reveal endocrine problems, which often occur with slowing of linear growth. Consideration of possible medical causes of obesity is essential, even though endocrine, syndromic, and monogenetic causes are rare (see Table 65.1). Growth hormone deficiency, hypothyroidism, and Cushing syndrome are examples of endocrine disorders that can lead to obesity. In general, these disorders manifest with slow linear growth. Because children who consume excessive amounts of calories tend to experi- ence accelerated linear growth, short stature warrants further evalua- tion. Genetic disorders associated with obesity may manifest extreme hyperphagia, or they can have coexisting dysmorphic features, cognitive impairment, vision and hearing abnormalities, or short stature. In some children with congenital disorders such as myelodysplasia or muscular Muscle, Other Tissues Autonomic Outputs dystrophy, lower levels of PA can lead to secondary obesity. Some medi- cations, such as atypical antipsychotics, can cause excessive appetite and hyperphagia, resulting in obesity (Table 65.3). Rapid weight gain in a child or adolescent taking one of these medications might require its dis- continuation. Poor linear growth and rapid changes in weight gain are indications for evaluation of possible medical causes. Exploration of family eating, nutritional, and activity patterns begins with a description of regular meal and snack times and family hab- its for walking, bicycle riding, active recreation, and screen time (TV, computer, video games). It is useful to request a 24-hour dietary recall with special attention to intake of fruits, vegetables, and water, as well as high-calorie foods and high-carbohydrate beverages. When pos- sible, evaluation by a nutritionist is extremely helpful. This information will form the basis for incremental changes in eating behavior, caloric intake, and PA during the intervention. 

444 Part V • Nutrition CNS LPB AP NTS DMV POMC CEA PVN BST I LH RET LARC ME POMC/AGRP Vagal afferent Adiposity signals Satiety signals CCK Fig. 65.3 Brain structures involved in energy homeostasis. Receipt of long-term adipostatic signals and acute satiety signals by neurons in arcu- ate nucleus and brainstem, respectively. Pale-blue boxes indicate nuclei containing proopiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons; tan boxes indicate nuclei containing melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) neurons that may serve to integrate adipostatic and satiety signals; and darker-blue boxes show some circumventricular organs involved in energy homeostasis. Magenta arrows designate a subset of projections of POMC neurons; blue arrows show a subset of projections of agouti-related peptide (AGRP) neurons. AP, Area postrema; ARC, arcuate nucleus; BST, bed nucleus of stria terminalis; CCK, cholecystokinin; CEA, central nucleus of amygdala; CNS, central nervous system; DMV, dorsal motor nucleus of vagus; LH, lateral hypothalamic area; LPB, lateral parabrachial nucleus; ME, median eminence; NTS, nucleus tractus solitarius; PVN, paraventricular nucleus of hypothalamus; RET, reticular formation. (Modified from Fan W, Ellacott KL, Halatchev IG, Takahashi K, Yu P, Cone RD. Cholecystokinin-mediated suppression of feeding involves the brainstem melanocortin system. Nat Neurosci. 2004;7(4):335-336.) Table 65.2 Obesity-Associated Comorbidities DISEASE CARDIOVASCULAR Dyslipidemia Hypertension POSSIBLE SYMPTOMS LABORATORY CRITERIA HDL <40, LDL > 130, total cholesterol >200 mg/dL SBP >95% for sex, age, height Fasting total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, triglycerides Serial testing, urinalysis, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine ENDOCRINE Type 2 diabetes mellitus Acanthosis nigricans, polyuria, polydipsia Metabolic syndrome Fasting blood glucose >110, hemoglobin Aic insulin level, C-peptide, oral glucose tolerance test Fasting glucose, LDL and HDL cholesterol Polycystic ovary syndrome Central adiposity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, hypertension, glucose intolerance Irregular menses, hirsutism, acne, insulin resistance, hyperandrogenemia Pelvic ultrasound, free testosterone, LH, FSH GASTROINTESTINAL Gallbladder disease Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) Abdominal pain, vomiting, jaundice Hepatomegaly, abdominal pain, dependent edema, 1 transaminases Can progress to fibrosis, cirrhosis Ultrasound AST, ALT, ultrasound, CT, or MRI NEUROLOGIC Pseudotumor cerebri Migraines ORTHOPEDIC Blount disease (tibia vara) Musculoskeletal problems Headaches, vision changes, papilledema Hemicrania, headaches Cerebrospinal fluid opening pressure, CT, MRI Vone Severe bowing of tibia, knee pain, limp Knee radiographs Back pain, joint pain, frequent strains or sprains, Radiographs limp, hip pain, groin pain, leg bowing Hip pain, knee pain, limp, decreased mobility of hip Hip radiographs Slipped capital femoral epiphysis PSYCHOLOGIC Behavioral complications Anxiety, depression, low self-esteem, disordered Child Behavior Checklist, Children's Depression Inventory, eating, signs of depression, worsening school Peds QL, Eating Disorder Inventory 2, subjective ratings performance, social isolation, problems with of stress and depression, Behavior Assessment System bullying or being bullied for Children, Pediatric Symptom Checklist PULMONARY Asthma Shortness of breath, wheezing, coughing, Pulmonary function tests, peak flow exercise intolerance Obstructive sleep apnea Snoring, apnea, restless sleep, behavioral Polysomnography, hypoxia, electrolytes (respiratory problems acidosis with metabolic alkalosis) ALT, Alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; CT, computed tomography; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LH, luteinizing hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; Peds OL, Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory; SBP, systolic blood pressure. 

Table 65.3 Medications Associated with Obesity Prednisone and other glucocorticoids Thioridazine Olanzapine Clozapine Quetiapine Risperidone Lithium Amitriptyline and other tricyclic antidepressants Paroxetine Valproate Carbamazepine Gabapentin Cyproheptadine Propranolol and other ß blockers Fig. 65.4 Acanthosis nigricans. From Gahagan S. Child and adoles- cent obesity. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care. 2004;34:6-43. Initial assessment of the overweight or obese child includes a com- plete review of bodily systems, focusing on the possibility of comorbid conditions (see Table 65.2). Developmental delay and visual and hear- ing impairment can be associated with genetic disorders. Difficulty sleeping, snoring, or daytime sleepiness suggests sleep apnea. Abdomi- nal pain might suggest NAFLD. Symptoms of polyuria, nocturia, or polydipsia may be the result of type 2 diabetes. Hip or knee pain can be caused by secondary orthopedic problems, including Blount disease and slipped capital femoral epiphysis. Irregular menses may be associ- ated with polycystic ovary syndrome. Acanthosis nigricans can suggest insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (Fig. 65.4). The family history begins with identifying other obese family members. Parental obesity is an important risk for child obesity. If all family members are obese, focusing the intervention on the entire family is reasonable. The child may be at increased risk for develop- ing type 2 diabetes if a family history exists. Identification of a family history of hypertension, CV disease, or metabolic syndrome indicates increased risk for developing these obesity-associated conditions. If the clinician helps the family to understand that childhood obesity increases the risk for developing these chronic diseases, this educa- tional intervention might serve as motivation to improve their nutri- tion and PA. Physical examination should be thorough, focusing on possible comorbidities (see Table 65.2). Careful screening for hypertension using an appropriately sized blood pressure cuff is important. Sys- tematic examination of the skin can reveal acanthosis nigricans, suggesting insulin resistance, or hirsutism, suggesting polycystic ovary syndrome. Tanner staging can reveal premature adrenarche secondary to advanced sexual maturation in overweight and obese females. Laboratory testing for fasting plasma glucose, triglycerides, low- density lipoprotein and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and liver Chapter 65 • Overweight and Obesity 445 Table 65.4 Normal Laboratory Values for Recommended Tests LABORATORY TEST NORMAL VALUE Glucose <110 mg/dL Insulin <15 mU/L Hemoglobin Ate <5.7% AST (age 2-8yr) <58 U/L AST (age 9-15yr) <46 U/L AST (age 15-18yr) <35 U/L ALT <35 U/L Total cholesteroll < 170 mg/dL LDL <110 mg/dL HDL >45mg/dL Triglycerides (age 0-9 yr) <75mg/dL Triglycerides (age 10-19 yr) <90mg/dL AST, Aspartate transaminase; ALT, alanine transaminase; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein. From Children's Hospital of Wisconsin. The NEW (nutrition, exercise and weight management) kids program. http://www.chw.org/display/displayFile.asp?docid=33672& filename=/Groups/NEWKids/NewKidsReferral.PDF. function tests are recommended as part of the initial evaluation for newly identified pediatric obesity (Table 65.4). Overweight children (BMI 85th-95th percentile) who have a family history of diabetes mel- litus or signs of insulin resistance should also be evaluated with a fast- ing plasma glucose test. Other laboratory testing should be guided by history or physical examination findings. Figure 65.5 provides a rec- ommended approach to categorization, evaluation, and treatment. INTERVENTION Evidence shows that some interventions result in modest but significant and sustained improvement in body mass. Based on behavior change theories (see Chapter 18), treatment includes specifying target behaviors, self-monitoring, goal setting, stimulus control, and promotion of self- efficacy and self-management skills. Behavior changes associated with improving BMI include drinking lower quantities of sugar-sweetened beverages, consuming higher-quality diets, increasing exercise, decreas- ing screen time, and self-weighing. Most successful interventions have been family based and consider the child's developmental age. "Parent- only" treatment may be as effective as "parent-child" treatment. Because obesity is multifactorial, not all children and adolescents will respond to the same approach. For example, loss-of-control eating, associated with weight gain and obesity, predicts poor outcome in response to family- based treatment. Furthermore, clinical treatment programs are expen- sive and not widely available. Therefore interest has grown in novel approaches such as internet-based treatments and guided self-help. It is important to begin with clear recommendations about appro- priate caloric intake for the obese child (Table 65.5). Working with a dietitian is essential. Meals should be based on fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean meat, fish, and poultry. Prepared foods should be chosen for their nutritional value, with attention to calories and fat. Foods that provide excessive calories and low nutritional value should be reserved for infrequent treats. The World Health Organization recommends avoiding artificial sweeteners (aspartame, sucralose, stevia). Weight reduction diets in adults generally do not lead to sustained weight loss. Therefore the focus should be on changes that can be main- tained for life. Attention to eating patterns is helpful. Families should be encouraged to plan family meals, including breakfast. It is almost impossible for a child to make changes in nutritional intake and eat- ing patterns if other family members do not make the same changes. 

446 Part V • Nutrition BMI ≥ 85th Percentile History and physical examination Abnormal Normal Additional evaluations based on findings Anti-psychotic drug use Evaluate for obesity comorbidities (Table 65.2) Present Absent Attenuated growth velocity Neuro- developmental abnormalities or severe hyperphagia CNS injury Reevaluate drug therapy/ choice Initiate lifestyle changes and specific treatment of co-morbidity Initiate lifestyle changes Continued weight gain > 6 months + Weight loss/ stabilization Endocrine evaluation Genetic evaluation Hypothalamic obesity Maintain Consider support for pharmacotherapy lifestyle changes and/or surgery and comorbidity treatment Continued weight gain Reevaluate pituitary function and/or hormone therapy Data supporting use of these interventions are limited to pubertal individuals Is there developmental delay? Yes Negative Karyotype: DNA methylation studies Positive Negative Measure leptin, insulin*, and proinsulin* Positive Negative Prader-Willi syndrome Is there evidence of retinal dystrophy, photophobia, or nystagmus? Congenital leptin deficiency PCSK1 deficiency Molecular genetic studies Positive Negative Leptin/leptin receptor deficiency Bardet-Biedl syndrome Alstrom syndrome TUB deficiency Albright hereditary POMC deficiency osteodystrophy BDNF, TrKB, SIM1 MC4R deficiency deficiency SH2B1 deficiency KSR2 deficiency Fig. 65.5 Diagnostic and treatment algorithm for the evaluation of the overweight or obese child. *Measure insulin and proinsulin in patients with clinical features of PCSK1 deficiency. BMI, Body mass index; CNS, central nervous system. (From Faroogi SOR, O'Rahilly S. Genetic obesity syndromes. In Grant S, ed. The Genetics of Obesity. New York: Springer; 2014, pp. 23-32; originally adapted from August GP, Caprio S, Fennoy 1, et al. Prevention and treatment of pediatric obesity: An Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline based on expert opinion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008;93:4576-4599.) Dietary needs also change developmentally; adolescents require greatly increased calories during their growth spurts, and adults who lead inactive lives need fewer calories than active, growing children. Psychologic strategies are helpful. The "traffic light" diet groups foods into those that can be consumed without any limitations (green), in moderation (yellow), or reserved for infrequent treats (red) (Table 65.6). The concrete categories are very helpful to chil- dren and families. This approach can be adapted to any ethnic group orgiady he pae; Motivational intertening begins win agessing professional then engages the patient in developing a strategy to take the next step toward the ultimate goal of healthy nutritional intake. 

Chapter 65 • Overweight and Obesity 447 Table 65.5 Recommended Caloric Intake Designated by Age and Gender RELATIVELY SEDENTARY LEVEL OF ACTIVITY LIFE-STAGE GROUP Child Female Male AGE (YR) 2-3 4-8 9-13 14-18 4.8 9-13 14-18 (KCAL) 1,000 1,200 1,600 1,800 1,400 1,800 2,200 MODERATE LEVEL OF ACTIVITY (KCAL) 1,000-1,400 1,400-1,600 1,600-2,000 2,000 1,400-1,600 1,800-2,200 2,400-2,800 ACTIVE (KCAL) 1,000-1,400 1,400-1,800 1,800-2,200 2,400 1,600-2,000 2,000-2,600 2,800-3,200 Adapted from U.S. Department of Agriculture. Dietary guidelines for Americans, 2005. http://www.health.gov/DIETARYGUIDELINES/dga2005/document/html/chapter2.htm. Table 65.6 FEATURE Quality Types of food Quantity "Traffic Light" Diet Plan GREEN LIGHT FOODS Low-calorie, high-fiber, low-fat, nutrient-dense Fruits, vegetables Unlimited YELLOW LIGHT FOODS Nutrient-dense, but higher in calories and fat Lean meats, dairy, starches, grains Limited RED LIGHT FOODS High in calories, sugar, and fat Fatty meats, sugar, sugar-sweetened beverages, fried foods Infrequent or avoided This method allows the professional to take the role of a coach, helping the child and family reach their goals. Other behavioral approaches include family rules about where food may be consumed "not in the bedroom"). Increasing PA without decreasing caloric intake is unlikely to metabolic profiles in obese children and adolescents. Furthermore, it can increase aerobic fitness and decrease percent body fat even with- out weight loss. Therefore increasing PA can decrease risk for CV disease, improve well-being, and contribute to weight loss. Increased PA can be accomplished by walking to school, engaging in PA dur- ing leisure time with family and friends, or enrolling in organized sports. Children are more likely to be active if their parents are active; family PA is recommended. When adults lose signiticant weight, they may regain that weight despite eating fewer calories. The body may adapt to weight loss by reducing the basal metabolic rate (BMR), thus requiring fewer calories. One approach to this phenomenon is to increase PA. Active pursuits can replace more sedentary activities. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that screen time be restricted to no more than 2 hours/day for children >2 years old and that children <2 years old not watch television. Screen time in general, and TV watching in particular, is often associated with eating and poorer-quality diets, as many highly caloric food products are marketed directly to children during child-oriented television programs. Pediatric healthcare providers should assist families to develop goals to change nutritional intake and PA. They can also provide the child and family with needed information. The family should not expect immediate lowering of BMI percentile related to behavioral changes, but can instead count on a gradual decrease in the rate of BMI percen- tile increase until it stabilizes, followed by a gradual decrease. Refer- ral to multidisciplinary, comprehensive pediatric weight management programs is ideal for obese children whenever possible. Pharmacotherapy for weight loss in the pediatric population is understudied. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have evaluated many medications, including metformin, orlistat, sibutramine, and exenatide (Table 65.7). Available medications result in modest weight loss or BMI improvement, even when combined with behav- ioral interventions. Various classes of drugs are of interest, includ- ing those that decrease energy intake or act centrally as anorexiants, those that affect the availability of nutrients through intestinal or renal tubular reabsorption, and those that affect metabolism. One U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved medication for obesity in children <16 years old is orlistat, which decreases absorption of fat, resulting in modest weight loss. Complications include flatulence, oily stools, and spotting. This agent offers little benefit to severely obese adolescents. Saxenda (liraglutide) and semaglutide are also FDA approved for chronic weight management among pediatric patients aged 12 and older who are obese. Both drugs are glucagon-like peptide-1 recep- tor agonists, are approved for children ≥12 years old, and have been effective in reducing weight. In addition, semaglutide improves adverse cardiometabolic features associated with obesity. Adverse reactions include headache, abdominal pain, emesis, and diarrhea. Long-term therapy may increase the risk of medullary thyroid car- cinoma and pancreatitis. This class of medication has produced the most significant weight loss of drug-treated obesity. Because multiple redundant neural mechanisms act to protect body weight, promoting weight loss is extremely difficult. Thus there is considerable interest in combining therapies that simulta- neously target multiple weight-regulating pathways. One promising example is the combination of amylin analogs (decreases food intake and slows gastric emptying) with leptin, which has no anorexigenic effects when given alone. This combination requires injection and is in clinical trials in adults. Another FDA-approved drug for adults is lorcaserin, a selective serotonin 2a receptor agonist. Some medica- tions approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, such as other glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonists and sodium-glucose con- transporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors, are being evaluated for treatment of obesity in adults. Establishing long-term safety and tolerability 

448 Part V • Nutrition Table 65.7 Medications for Weight Management with Mechanism of Action, Availability, and Dosing AVAILABLE FOR MEAN PERCENTAGE CHRONIC USE WEIGHT LOSS MECHANISM OF MEDICATION Phentermine, 15- 30 mg PO ACTION USA EU PLACEBO DRUG ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES Sympathomimetic For short- No Not stated in Not stated in Inexpensive Side effect profile; term label label no long-term use data* Orlistat, 120 mg PO • Pancreatic lipase Yes tid before meals inhibitor Yes -2.6%1 -6.1%†| Not absorbed; long-term data* Modes wet pr loss; Lorcaserin, 10 mg 5-HTze serotonin agonist Yes No -2.5% -5.8% PO bid with little affinity for Mid side feats, Expensive; modest weight loss other serotonergic receptors Phentermine/ Sympathomimetic Yes No -1.2% -7.8% (mid- Robust weight Expensive; topiramate ER, anticonvulsant (GABA 7.5 mg/46 mg receptor modulation, dose) loss; long-term teratogen -9.8% (full or 15 mg/92 mg carbonic anhydrase dose) data* PO indicated as inhibition, glutamate rescue (requires antagonism) titration) Naltrexone SR/ Opioid receptor Yes bupropion SR, antagonist; dopamine Yes - 1.3% -5.4% Reduces food Moderately 32 mg/360 mg PO and noradrenaline teaminda long- expensive; side effect profile (requires titration) reuptake inhibitor Liraglutide, 3.0 mg GLP-1 receptor agonist Yes Yes -3% -7.4% (full Side effect profile; Expensive; injection (requires dose) long-term data* injectable titration) Semaglutide, 2.4 mg GLP-1 receptor agonist Yes once weekly Yes -1% -10 to - 15% As above As above injection Information is from US product labels, except where noted. The data supporting these tables are derived from the prescribing information labeling approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. *Data from randomized controlled trials lasting >52 wk. †Assuming the average patient in the orlistat and placebo groups weighed 100 kg at baseline. apted de lays, Field, Bike iding SP, tanage relent, POor Laid 20e dalry tid, 31965, - 1950. in children is a challenge because medications of interest have CNS effects or interfere with absorption of nutrients. Teratologic effects must be considered for use in adolescent females. Setmelanotide, which binds to and activates MC4R, is approved to treat proopi- omelanocortin deficiency, leptic receptor deficiency, and proprotein subtilisin/kexin type 1 disorder. Hormone replacement therapy is available for patients with leptin deficiency and may become avail- able for patients with POMC deficiency. In some cases, it is reasonable to refer adolescents for bariatric sur- gery evaluation. The American Pediatric Surgical Association guidelines recommend that surgery be considered only in children with complete or near-complete skeletal maturity, a BMI ≥40, and a medical complica- tion resulting from obesity, after they have failed 6 months of a multidis- ciplinary weight management program. Surgical approaches include the Roux-en-Y and the adjustable gastric band (Fig. 65.6). Endoscopically placed space-occupying fluid or air-filled gastric balloons(s) is approved for adults and may be a nonsurgical intervention. In obese adults, bar- iatric surgery reduces the risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. In obese adult patients with existing type 2 diabetes, bariatric surgery improves diabetic control. Nutritional complications of bariatric surgery include malabsorption and vitamin (A, By, B,, B6, B|2, D, E, K) and min- eral (copper, iron) deficiencies that require supplementation. public health programs. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend a variety of initiatives to combat the current obesogenic environment, including promotion of breastfeeding, access to fruits and vegetables, walkable communities, and 60 minutes/day of activity for children. The PREVENTION Prevention of child and adolescent obesity is essential for public health in the United States and most other countries (Tables 65.8 and 65.9). Efforts by pediatric providers can supplement national and community industry to promote consumption of healthier foods should be consid- ered. Marketing of unhealthy foods to children is now being regulated. Changes in federal food programs are expected, including commod- ity foods, the Women, Infant, and Children Supplemental Food Pro- gram (WIC), and school lunch programs, to meet the needs of today's children. Pediatric prevention efforts begin with careful monitoring of weight and BMI percentiles at healthcare maintenance visits. Attention to changes in BMI percentiles can alert the pediatric provider to increas- ing adiposity before the child becomes overweight or obese. All families should be counseled about healthy nutrition for their children, because the current prevalence of overweight and obesity in adults is 65%. There- fore approximately two thirds of all children can be considered at risk for becoming overweight or obese at some time in their lives. Those who have an obese parent are at increased risk. Prevention efforts begin with promotion of exclusive breastfeeding for 6 months and total breastfeeding for 12 months. Introduction of infant foods at 6 months should focus on cereals, fruits, and vegetables. Lean meats, poultry, and fish may be intro- duced later in the first year of life. Parents should be specifically coun seled to avoid introducing highly sugared beverages and foods in the first 

Chapter 65 • Overweight and Obesity 449 Laparoscopic Adjustable Gastric Banding Vertical Banded Gastroplasty Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass Biliopancreatic Diversion Biliopancreatic Diversion Vertical Sleeve Ileal Interposition Santoro IIII with Duodenal Switch Gastrectomy with Sleeve Gastrectomy Fig. 65.6 Bariatric surgical procedures, including laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, and vertical sleeve gastrec- tomy techniques. year of life. Instead, they should expose their infants and young children to a rich variety of fruits, vegetables, grains, lean meats, poultry, and fish to facilitate acceptance of a diverse and healthy diet. Parenting matters, and authoritative parents are more likely to have children with a healthy weight than those who are authoritarian or permissive. Families who eat regularly scheduled meals together are less likely to have overweight or obese children. Child health professionals can address a child's nutri- tional status and provide expertise in child growth and development. Child health professionals can also promote PA during regular healthcare maintenance visits. Parents who spend some of their lei- sure time in PA promote healthy weight in their children. Beginning in infancy, parents should be cognizant of their child's developmental capability and need for PA. Because TV, computer, and video game time can replace health-promoting PA, physicians should coun sel parents to limit screen time for their children. Snacking during TV watching should be discouraged. Parents can help their children to understand that television commercials intend to sell a product. Children can learn that their parents will help them by responsibly choosing healthy foods. Because obesity is determined by complex multifactorial condi- tions, prevention will take efforts at multiple levels of social organi- zation. Successful programs include EPODE (Ensemble Prévenons 'Obésité Des Enfants), a multilevel prevention strategy that began in France and has been adopted by more than 500 communities in 6 countries. Shape Up Somerville is a citywide campaign to increase daily PA and healthy eating in Somerville, Massachusetts, since 2002. The "Let's Move" campaign was championed by former First Lady Michelle Obama. Because community and environmental factors are related to pediatric obesity risk, changes in local environments, daycare centers, schools, and recreational settings can have a public health impact. Programs can empower families to adopt practices that promote healthy lifestyles for children and adolescents. The most successful programs are comprehensive and rely on four strat- egies: political commitment to change, resources to support social 

450 Part V • Nutrition Table 65.8 Proposed Suggestions for Preventing Obesity PREGNANCY Normalize body mass index (BMI) before pregnancy. Do not smoke. Maintain moderate exercise as tolerated. In women with gestational diabetes, provide meticulous glucose control. Monitor gestational weight gain within Institute of Medicine (IOM) recommendations. POSTPARTUM AND INFANCY Breastfeeding: exclusive for 4-6 mo; continue with other foods for 12 mo. Postpone introduction of baby foods to 4-6 mo and juices to 12 mo. FAMILIES Eat meals as a family in a fixed place and time. Do not skip meals, especially breakfast. Do not allow television during meals. Use small plates and keep serving dishes away from the table. Avoid unnecessary sweet or fatty foods and sugar-sweetened drinks. Remove televisions from children's bedrooms; restrict times for TV viewing and video games. Do not use food as a reward. SCHOOLS Eliminate candy and cookie sales as fundraisers. Review the contents of vending machines and replace with healthier choices; eliminate sodas. Avoid financial support for sports teams from beverage and food industries. Install water fountains and hydration stations. Educate teachers, especially physical education and science faculty, about basic nutrition and the benefits of physical activity (PA). Educate children from preschool through high school on appropriate diet and lifestyle. Mandate minimum standards for physical education, including 60 min of strenuous exercise 5 times weekly. Encourage "the walking school bus": groups of children walking to school with adult supervision. COMMUNITIES Increase family-friendly exercise and safe play facilities for children of all ages. Develop more mixed residential-commercial developments for walkable and bicyclable communities. Discourage the use of elevators and moving walkways. Provide information on how to shop and prepare healthier versions of culture-specific foods. HEALTHCARE PROVIDERS Explain the biologic and genetic contributions to obesity. Give age-appropriate expectations for body weight in children. Work toward classifying obesity as a disease to promote recognition, reimbursement for care, and willingness and ability to provide treatment. INDUSTRY Mandate age appropriate nutrition labeling for products aimed at children (e.g., "red light/green light" foods, with portion sizes). Encourage marketing of interactive video games in which children must exercise to play. Use celebrity advertising directed at children for healthful foods to promote breakfast and regular meals. Reduce portion size (drinks and meals). GOVERNMENT AND REGULATORY AGENCIES Classify childhood obesity as a legitimate disease Find novel ways to fund healthy lifestyle programs (e.g., with revenues from food and drink taxes). Subsidize government-sponsored programs to promote the consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables. Provide financial incentives to the industry to develop more healthful products and to educate the consumer on product content. Provide financial incentives to schools that initiate innovative PA and nutrition programs. Allow tax deductions for the cost of weight loss and exercise programs. Provide urban planners with funding to establish bicycle, jogging, and walking paths. Ban advertising of fast foods, non-nutritious foods, and sugar- sweetened beverages directed at preschool children, and restrict advertising to school-aged children. Ban toys as gifts to children for purchasing fast foods. Adapted from Speiser PW, Rudolf MCJ, Anhalt H, et al. Consensus statement: Childhood obesity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90:1871-1887. Table 65.9 Anticipatory Guidance: Establishing Healthy Eating Habits in Children Do not punish a child during mealtimes with regard to eating. The Forcing a child to eat a certain food will decrease the child's emotional atmosphere of a meal is very important. Interactions preference for that food. Children's wariness of new foods is during meals should be pleasant and happy. normal and should be expected. Offering a variety of foods with Do not use foods as rewards. low-energy density helps children balance energy intake. Parents, siblings, and peers should model healthy eating, tasting Parents should control what foods are in the home. Restricting new foods, and eating a well-balanced meal. access to foods in the home will increase rather than decrease a Children should be exposed to a wide range of foods, tastes, and child's desire for that food. textures. Children tend to be more aware of satiety than adults, so allow New foods should be offered multiple times. Repeated exposure children to respond to satiety and stop eating. Do not force leads to acceptance and liking. children to "clean their plate." Adapted from Benton D. Role of parents in the determination of food preferences of children and the development of obesity. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004;28:858-869. marketing and changes, support services, and evidence-based prac- tices. Community-wide programs are important because neighbor- hood environmental factors (e.g., poverty) have been associated with obesity in its residents. There is considerable interest in focusing these efforts early in the life cycle. Beginning obesity prevention during pregnancy and engaging health systems, early childhood programs, and community systems to support healthier life cycles is an approach with great promise. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Chapter 66 Vitamin A Deficiencies and Excess Libo Tan and A. Catharine Ross OVERVIEW OF VITAMIN A Vitamin A is a fat-soluble micronutrient that cannot be synthesized de novo by mammals; thus it is an obligatory dietary factor. The term vitamin A is generally used to refer to a group of compounds that possess the biologic activity of all-trans retinol (Fig. 66.1). Vita- min A is recognized as being essential for all vertebrates for normal vision, reproduction, cell and tissue differentiation, and immune system functions. Vitamin A plays critical roles in neonatal devel- opment. It is required for normal embryonic development, hemato- poiesis, and growth and differentiation of many types of cells. Vitamin A can be obtained from the diet from preformed vitamin A (retinyl esters, such as retinyl palmitate) primarily in foods of animal origin. Organ meats (especially liver and kidney) are very rich in vitamin A, whereas other meats, milk, and cheese contain moderate levels. Other sources of vitamin A include several provi- tamin A carotenoids, which are found naturally in many fruits and vegetables, especially yellow-orange vegetables (pumpkin, squash, sweet potato) and leafy green vegetables (chard, spinach, broccoli). One of the most abundant carotenoids is ß-carotene. Several culti- vars, or biofortified forms, of sweet potatoes have been introduced to elevate carotene intake in areas of the world where vitamin A deficiency still is prevalent. a-carotene and oxygenated carotenoids, such as ß-cryptoxanthin, found in oranges, also possess vitamin A activity, but at a lower bioactivity. In the body, these precursors are Chapter 66 • Vitamin A Deficiencies and Excess 451 used for the synthesis of two essential metabolites of vitamin A. All-trans retinoic acid is the form required for cell differentiation and regulation of gene transcription and is the most bioactive form of vitamin A; 11-cis retinal is the form required for vision as the light-absorbing chromophore of the visual pigments rhodopsin and iodopsin. METABOLISM OF VITAMIN A Vitamin A compounds in foods must first be released through nor- mal digestive processes. Retinyl esters must first be hydrolyzed in the intestinal lumen to liberate unesterified retinol for absorption across the mucosal barrier. Once in the enterocyte, most of the reti- nol is reesterified, forming new retinyl esters for inclusion in chy- lomicrons. Approximately 70-90% of dietary preformed vitamin A is absorbed provided there is approximately 10 g of fat in the meal; otherwise, the absorption efficiency is lower. Chronic intestinal dis- orders or lipid malabsorption can result in vitamin A deficiency. Provitamin-A carotenoids are transported from the intestinal lumen into the enterocytes by specific transporters and then either incorporated intact into chylomicrons or cleaved to form retinal, a precursor for retinol; B-carotene becomes retinol through this process. The estimated efficiency of absorption of carotenoids is 20-50%, lower than for preformed vitamin A. Moreover, the effi- ciency is reduced when the body's vitamin A status is high, and because vitamin A status may vary, there is significant interindi- vidual variability in absorption efficiency. The carotene cleavage enzyme ß-carotene monooxygenase, present in the enterocyte and in other tissues at lower levels, exhibits certain single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that, at least in vitro, reduce the efficiency of conversion of ß-carotene to retinol. Clinical studies suggest a similar effect in vivo. Once retinol is esterified in the enterocyte, retinyl ester is then packaged into nascent chylomicrons, which are secreted into the lymphatic vessels, enter the systemic circulation, and are then transported to and taken up by various tissues. When vitamin A status is adequate, in most mammals, including humans, the liver Retinol B-Carotene R = CH2OH, retinol R = CH2O-fatty acyl group, retinyl ester R = COOH, retinoic acid Dietary forms: Preformed vitamin A Absorption: Intracellular metabolism: Esterification RE ≤ and storage Relinol Hydrolysis, [chylomicron mobilization transport, storage in liver, eyes (RPE), kidneys, testes, etc.] Intestinal hydrolysis Oxidation Reduction B-carotene and provitamin A carotenoids intestinal deavage Oxidation Retinal Oxidized → RA metabolites Conjugation reactions Deactivation products B Excretion Fig. 66.1 A, Vitamin A structures. B, Overview of vitamin A metabolism. RA, All-trans retinoic acid; RE, retinyl ester; RPE, retinal pigment epithelium. 

452 Part V • Nutrition is the major site of chylomicron vitamin A uptake and storage, with potentially high levels of retinyl esters within hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). As vitamin A status deteriorates into the deficient range, vitamin A stores are mobilized from the HSCs, such that the released retinol can be taken up and used by extrahepatic tissues. Circulat- ing retinol is bound to a specific transport protein, retinol-binding protein (RBP), which in turn binds to the thyroid hormone trans- port protein, transthyretin (TTR); this complex delivers plasma retinol (and the thyroid hormone) to a large number of vitamin A target tissues. The major physiologic mediator of retinol uptake by cells in many tissues is Strao, a widely expressed multitransmem- brane domain protein that functions as a cell surface receptor for retinol bound to RBP. Strab is not significantly expressed in the liver, but a homologous receptor may perform the similar function. Within target tissues, retinol is either esterified into retinyl esters for storage or oxidized into retinoic acid for function. In the eye, 11-cis-retinal is formed and bound to the protein rhodopsin (rods) or iodopsin (cones), where it functions as a light-sensing receptor. Inflammation Causing Low Plasma Retinol Inflammation is a cause of reduced levels of plasma retinol as a result of reduced synthesis of RBP and TTR. This condition may mimic a lack of vitamin A, but will not be corrected by supplemen- tation. In U.S. adults, those with moderately elevated levels of CRP, indicative of mild inflammation, had lower average plasma retinol levels. The extent to which inflammation is a factor in low plasma retinol in children is uncertain but likely significant in acute infec- tious diseases such as measles, and possibly in chronic inflamma- tory conditions such as cystic fibrosis. FUNCTIONS OF VITAMIN A AND MECHANISMS OF Except for its role in vision, the pleiotropic actions of this micronu- trient are mediated by all-trans-retinoic acid (RA), which is a ligand for specific nuclear transcription factors, retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR), that regulate the expres- sion of several hundred genes. When an RAR is activated by RA, an RAR-RXR complex is formed, which binds to and activates spe- cific DNA sequences present in retinoid-responsive genes, RARES and RXREs. Genes can be either induced or repressed, depending on additional co-activators or co-repressors recruited to the RAR- RXR complex. Retinoid-regulated genes are involved in several fun- damental biologic activities, including regulation of cell division, death, and differentiation. The term retinoids is now applied to both natural and synthetic compounds with vitamin A activity, although it is most often used in the context of vitamin A and RA acting at the gene level. Numerous synthetic retinoids have gained clinical acceptance in the treatment of skin disorders and certain cancers. During embryonic development, RA is among the most important signaling molecules that determine body patterning (morphogenesis) Many physiologic processes are sensitive to a defciency or excess of vitamin A or RA, including reproduction, growth, bone development, and the functions of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, hematopoietic, and immune systems. Vitamin A supplementation may be particu- larly important in developing countries, where it reduces morbidity and mortality, presumably by enhancing immune function and host defense, from various infectious diseases, including measles (see Chap- Vitamin A plays a critical role in vision, mediated by 11-cis reti- nal. The human retina contains two distinct photoreceptor systems: the rods, in which rhodopsin senses light of low-intensity, and the cones, in which iodopsins detect different colors; 11-cis-retinal is the prosthetic group on both these visual proteins. The mechanism of vitamin A action is similar for rods and cones, based on pho- toisomerization of 11-cis to all-trans retinal (change shape when exposed to light), which initiates signal transduction via the optic nerve to the brain, resulting in visual sensation. After isomeriza- tion (also known as photobleaching), a series of reactions serves to regenerate the 11-cis retinal for resynthesis of rhodopsin and iodop- sin, as is necessary for an efficient visual process. Accessory cells, including retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells and Müller cells, are involved in this recycling process. VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY If the growing child has a well-balanced diet and obtains vitamin A from foods rich in vitamin A or provitamin A (Table 66.1), the risk of vitamin A deficiency is small. However, even subclinical vitamin A deficiency can have serious consequences. Deficiency states in developed countries are rare, except in some impoverished populations (see Chapter 62) or after mistakes in food preparation or with fad diets or restrictive/ elimination diets, but are common in many developing countries and often associ- ated with global malnutrition. In the clinical setting, vitamin defi- ciencies can also occur as complications in children with various chronic disorders or diseases. Information obtained in the medi- cal history related to dietary habits can be important in identifying the risk of such nutritional problems. Except for vitamin A, toxicity from excess intake of vitamins is rare. Table 66.1 summarizes the food sources, functions, and deficiency and excess symptoms of the Vitamin A Status in Neonates Neonates begin life with low levels of vitamin A in plasma, liver, and extrahepatic tissues compared with those in adults. Normal plasma levels of retinol are 20-50 ug/dL in infants and increase gradually as children become older. Median serum retinol values are 1.19 umol/L in both males and females ages 4-8 years; 1.4 and 1.33 umol/L in males and females, respectively, ages 9-13; and 1.71 and 1.57 umol/L in males and females, ages 14-18 (for conversion, 1 umol/L = 28.6 ug/dL). Values of 1.96 and 1.85 umol/L are found in 19- to 30-year-old adult men and women, respectively. Figure 66.2 shows the distribution of serum retinol concentrations in U.S. chil- dren. Few healthy children are severely vitamin A deficient, but the 5th percentile of children 4-8 years and 9-13 years of age, respec- tively, in the National Health and Examination Survey (NHANES) fell below 1.05 umol/L, which is interpreted as mild vitamin A Retinol levels are even lower in neonates in developing countries, where vitamin A intakes may be low and vitamin A deficiency is a common nutritional problem. Lower vitamin A stores and plasma retinol concentrations are also seen in low birthweight infants and in preterm newborns, and poor vitamin A status (plasma retinol concentrations <0.35 umol/L) may contribute to the development of chronic lung disease, such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD; see Chapter 127). Clinical Manifestations of Vitamin A Deficiency The most obvious symptoms of vitamin A deficiency are associated with changes in epithelial cell morphology and functions. In the intestines, mucus-secreting goblet cells are affected, and loss of an effective barrier against pathogens can cause diarrhea or impair- ment of epithelial barrier function. Similarly, mucus secretion by the epithelium is essential in the respiratory tract for the disposal of inhaled pathogens and toxicants. Characteristic epithelial changes result from vitamin A deficiency, including proliferation of basal cells, hyperkeratosis, and formation of stratified cornified squa- mous epithelium. Squamous metaplasia of the renal pelvis, ure- ters, vaginal epithelium, and the pancreatic and salivary ducts can lead to increased infections in these areas. In the urinary bladder, 

Table 66.1 NAMES AND SYNONYMS Retinol (vitamin A.); 1 ug retinol = 3.3 lU vitamin A = 1 RAE Provitamins A: the plant pigments a-, p-, and y-carotenes and cryptoxanthin have partial retinol activity: 12 mg B- carotene, or 24 g other provitamin A carotenoids = 1 ug retinol Vitamin A Characteristics CHARACTERISTICS Fat-soluble; heat- stable; destroyed by oxidation, drying Bile necessary for absorption Stored in liver Protected by vitamin E BIOCHEMICAL ACTION In vision, as retinal, for synthesis of the visual pigments rhodopsin and iodopsin In growth, reproduction, embryonic and fetal development, bone growth, immune and epithelial functions, via retinoic acid as a ligand for specific nuclear transcription factors, regulating genes involved in many tundamental cellular processes RAE, Retinol activity equivalent. 3.5 - 3.0 - Male, 5th Female, 5th Male, 50th I Female, 50th • Male, 95th 1 • Female, 95th 2.5 - 2.0- 1.5- 1.0- 0.5 - 0.0 + T T M F M F M F M F M F M F M F 4-8 У 9-13 у 14-18 у 19-30 у 31-50 У 51-70 у >71 у Age and sex groups Fig. 66.2 Distribution of serum retinol concentrations in U.S. children and adults by age and sex in the National Health and Nutrition Exami- nation Survey (NHANES). loss of epithelial integrity can result in pyuria and hematuria. In the skin, vitamin A deficiency manifests as dry, scaly, hyperkera- totic patches, typically on the arms, legs, shoulders, and buttocks. The combination of defective epithelial barriers to infection, low immune response, and lowered response to inflammatory stress, all from insufficient vitamin A, can cause poor growth and serious health problems in children. The most characteristic and specific signs of vitamin A deficiency are eye lesions, but these may manifest rather late in the progression of vitamin A deficiency, develop insidiously, and rarely occur before age 2 years. An earlier symptom of vitamin A deficiency is delayed Chapter 66 • Vitamin A Deficiencies and Excess 453 EFFECTS OF DEFICIENCY Nyctalopia Photophobia, xerophthalmia, Bitôt spots, conjunctivitis, keratomalacia leading to blindness Faulty epiphyseal bone formation Defective tooth enamel Keracoustinembranes and skin Stunted growth Impaired resistance to infection, anemia, reproductive failure, fetal abnormalities EFFECTS OF EXCESS Anorexia, slow growth, drying and cracking of skin, enlargement of liver and spleen, swelling and pain of long bones, bone fragility, increased intracranial pressure, alopecia, carotenemia Fetal abnormalities SOURCES Liver, fish liver oils Dairy products, except skim milk Egg yolk, fortified margarine, fortified skim milk Carotenoids from plants: green vegetables, yellow fruits, and vegetables Fig. 66.3 Advanced xerophthalmia with an opaque, dull cornea and some damage to the iris in a 1-yr-old boy. (From Oomen HAPC. Vitamin A deficiency, xerophthalmia and blindness. Nutr Rev. 1974;6:161-166.) dark adaptation as a result of reduced resynthesis of rhodopsin; this may progress to night blindness. Photophobia is a common symptom. The RPE, one of the structural elements of the retina, undergoes keratinization. When the RPE degenerates, the rods and cones have no support and eventually break down, resulting in blindness. As vitamin A deficiency progresses, the corneal and conjunctival epithelial tissues of the eye become severely altered because of a lack of sufficient RA for normal epithelial cell differentiation. The cor- nea protects the eye from the environment and is also important in light refraction. Stages in vitamin A deficiency include corneal kera- tinization and opacity, susceptibility to infection, and formation of dry, scaly layers of cells (xerophthalmia) (Figs. 66.3 and 66.4). The conjunctival membrane undergoes keratinization and may develop foamy-appearing plaques (Bitôt spots; Fig. 66.5). When lympho- cytes infiltrate the cornea in later stages of infection, it degenerates irreversibly (keratomalacia and corneal ulceration), resulting in irreversible blindness. These eye lesions are primarily diseases of 

454 Part V • Nutrition the young and are a major cause of blindness in developing coun tries. Although rates of xerophthalmia have fallen, the number of affected children is still too high. Treatment with vitamin A, up to the stage of keratomalacia, is effective in rapidly repleting the indi- vidual and saving vision. Other clinical signs of vitamin A deficiency include poor overall growth, diarrhea, susceptibility to infections, anemia, apathy, intellec- tual impairment, and increased intracranial pressure, with wide sepa- ration of the cranial bones at the sutures. There may be vision problems Fig. 66.4 Recovery from xerophthalmia, showing a permanent eye le- sion. (From Bloch CE. Blindness and other disease arising from deficient nutrition (lack of fat soluble A factor]. Am J Dis Child. 1924;27:139.) Fig. 66.5 Bitôt spots with hyperpigmentation seen in a 10-mo-old Indonesian boy. (From Oomen HAPC. Vitamin A deficiency, xerophthal- mia and blindness. Nutr Rev 1974;6:161-166.) as a consequence of bone overgrowth causing pressure on the optic nerve. Malnutrition, particularly protein deficiency, can cause vitamin A deficiency through impaired synthesis of retinol transport protein. In developing countries, subclinical or clinical zinc deficiency can increase the risk of vitamin A deficiency. There is also some evidence of marginal zinc intakes in U.S. children. Diagnosis Dark adaptation tests can be used to assess early-stage vitamin A deficiency. Although Bitôt spots develop relatively early, those related to active vitamin A deficiency are usually confined to preschool-age children. Xerophthalmia is a very characteristic lesion of vitamin A deficiency. For detection of less severe defi- ciency (marginal vitamin A status), methods include conjunctival impression cytology, relative dose response, and modified relative dose response tests. A diet history is useful in suggesting or ruling out low intake as a cause of symptoms. Marginal vitamin A sta- tus is relatively prevalent among pregnant and lactating women in low-resource (and therefore poor dietary intake) areas of the world. Although plasma retinol level is not a completely accurate indica- tor of vitamin A status, various guidelines have been proposed for categorizing vitamin A status based on serum retinol. In children, plasma retinol <0.35 umol/L is considered very deficient, 0.35-0.7 umol/L deficient, 0.7-1.05 umol/L marginal, and > 1.05 umol/L ade- quate. It has long been thought that a liver vitamin A concentra- tion >20 ug/g is needed to support a normal rate of secretion of retinol-RBP into plasma, and therefore normal delivery of retinol to peripheral tissues. Epidemiology and Public Health Issues Vitamin A deficiency and xerophthalmia still occur through- out much of the developing, income-poor world and are linked to undernourishment and complicated by illness. Various public health programs to provide large doses of vitamin A periodically have been instituted. Vitamin A supplementation is considered part of the strategy of the World Health Organization (WHO) Millen- nium Development Goals to reduce <5 year mortality. Neonatal supplementation may be most effective in populations with a high incidence of maternal vitamin A deficiency. Other strategies being tested include improving the content of -carotene in staple foods through plant breeding (biofortification). Dietary Reference Intakes for the Healthy Population Table 66.2 summarizes the dietary reference intakes for infants and children. Dietary reference intake values include the estimated aver- age requirement (EAR), which is the mean biologic requirement for needs of >97% of the population (thus the needs of many people are more than met by consuming the RDA); and the upper level Table 66.2 AGE RANGE 0-6 mo 7-12 mo 1-3yr 48yr 9-13 yr 14-18 yr *ug retinol equivalents per day. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin A in Children RECOMMENDED DIETARY ALLOWANCE (RDA)* 400 500 300 400 600 900, male; 700, female UPPER LEVEL (UL)* 600 600 600 900 1,700 2,800 COMMENTS The recommended intake for infants is an adequate intake, based on the amount of vitamin A normally present in breast milk. The UL applies only to preformed vitamin A (retinol). 

Chapter 66 • Vitamin A Deficiencies and Excess 455 of normal (UL), an intake level above which risk of adverse effects may increase; the UL pertains only to chronic consumption of preformed vitamin A. The RDA is expressed as retinol activ- ity equivalents (RAEs; 1 RAE = 1 ug all-trans retinol; equivalents for provitamin-A in foods = 12 mg B-carotene, 24 ug a-carotene, or 24 ug 6-cryptoxanthin). From infancy to age 18 years, the KDA increases as a result of increased body size, becoming higher for males than for females during adolescence. During pregnancy the RDA is 750-770 ug, and during lactation it increases to 1,200-1,300 ug to ensure sufficient vitamin A content during breastfeeding. It is noteworthy that, especially for young children, the UL is only about two times higher than the RDA. This suggests that for children whose diet is good, care should be taken not to overuse dietary supple- ments (vitamin-mineral supplements) containing preformed vitamin A and/or to avoid excessive consumption of foods that are very rich in vitamin A, such as liver. Vitamin A for Treatment of Deficiency A daily supplement of 1,500 ug of vitamin A is sufficient for treat- ing latent vitamin A deficiency, after which intake at the RDA level should be the goal. In children without overt signs of vitamin A deficiency but suspected low reserves of vitamin A, rates of morbid- ity and mortality, as from viral infections such as measles, have been reduced by a weekly dose of vitamin A at the RDA level. More often, higher doses of 30-60 mg of retinol (100,000-200,000 IU/child) are given once or twice, under careful monitoring to avoid toxicity associated with excess vitamin A. Xerophthalmia is treated by giv- ing 1,500 ug/kg body weight orally for 5 days, followed by intramus- cular injection of 7,500 ug of vitamin A in oil, until recovery. HYPERVITAMINOSIS A Chronic hypervitaminosis A results from excessive ingestion of preformed vitamin A (retinol or retinyl ester), generally for sev- eral weeks or months. Hypervitaminosis A is most often caused by vitamin A-containing supplements or food faddism, including high intakes of organ meats. Chronic daily intakes of 15,000 ug and 6,000 ug can be toxic in adults and children, respectively. Because there is no antidote for hypervitaminosis A, and vitamin A is readily stored in liver and other tissues, it is most important to prevent tox- icity. Symptoms may subside rapidly on withdrawal of the vitamin, but the rate of improvement depends on the amount of vitamin A stored in tissues. Extreme hypervitaminosis A is fatal. Signs of subacute or chronic toxicity can include headache; vomiting (early signs); anorexia; dry, itchy, desquamating skin; and seborrheic cuta- neous lesions. With chronic hypervitaminosis A, one may observe fissuring at the corners of the mouth; alopecia and coarsening of the hair; bone abnormalities, including swelling and resorption; enlargement of the liver and spleen; diplopia; increased intracranial pressure; dryness of the mucous membranes; and desquamation of the palms and the soles of the feet. Radiographs may show hyper- ostosis affecting several long bones, especially in the middle of the shafts (Fig. 66.6). Manifestations of hypervitaminosis A may also include nonspecific changes in affect, including severe headache, irritability, stupor, and limited motion. Serum levels of vitamin A are elevated, mostly in the form of retinyl esters carried in lipo- proteins, which may result in tissue damage and release of liver enzymes into plasma. Hypercalcemia and/or liver cirrhosis may be present. Hypervitaminosis A is distinct from cortical hyperostosis (see Chapter 741). In young children, signs of vitamin A toxicity include vomiting and bulging fontanels, neither of which is specific. Combined with anorexia, pruritus, and a lack of weight gain, vitamin A toxicity should be considered. Less common symptoms include diplopia, papilledema, Fig. 66.6 Hyperostosis of the ulna and tibia in 21-mo-old infant, re- sulting from vitamin A positioning. A, Long, wavy cortical hyperostosis of the ulna (arrow). B, Long, wavy cortical hyperostosis of the right tibia (arrow), with a striking absence of metaphyseal changes. (From Caffey J. Pediatric X-Ray Diagnosis, 5th ed. Chicago: Year Book; 1967: 994.) cranial nerve palsies, and other symptoms suggesting pseudotumor cerebri. If high levels of vitamin A or synthetic retinoids are taken early in pregnancy, severe congenital malformations may occur in the fetus. Teratogenicity has been associated with therapeutic doses (0.5-1.5 mg/kg) of oral 13-cis-retinoic acid (e.g., Accutane), gen- erally taken for the treatment of acne or cancer, during the first trimester of pregnancy. A high incidence (>20%) of spontaneous abortions and birth defects, including characteristic craniofacial abnormalities, has prompted the U.S. Food and Drug Administra- tion (FDA) to enact more stringent prescription regulations for such drugs in women of childbearing age to attempt to reduce these birth defects. Carotenoids, even in high doses, are not associated with toxic- ity but can cause yellowing of the skin (carotenodermia), includ- ing palms of the hands, and high levels in serum (carotenemia); this relatively benign state disappears slowly when carotene intake is reduced. Children with liver disease, diabetes mellitus, or hypo- thyroidism are more susceptible. Food faddism, such as excessive consumption of carotene-rich foods and juices, may be a cause of carotenodermia. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

456 Part V • Nutrition Chapter 67 Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah Vitamin B complex includes a number of water-soluble nutrients, including thiamine (vitamin B1), riboflavin (B2), niacin (B3), pyridox- ine (B6), folate (B9), cobalamin (B12), biotin (B7), and pantothenic acid (B5). Choline and inositol are also considered parts of the B com- plex and are important for normal body functions, but specific defi- ciency syndromes have not been attributed to a lack of these factors in the diet (Table 67.1). B-complex vitamins serve as coenzymes in many metabolic path- ways that are functionally closely related. Consequently, a lack of one of the vitamins has the potential to interrupt a chain of chemi- cal processes, including reactions that are dependent on other vita- mins, and ultimately can produce diverse clinical manifestations. Because diets deficient in any one of the B-complex vitamins are often poor sources of other B vitamins, manifestations of several vitamin B deficiencies usually can be observed in the same person. It is therefore a general practice in a patient who has evidence of defi- ciency of a specific B vitamin to treat with the entire B-complex group of vitamins. Table 67.1 Water-Soluble Vitamins NAMES AND TREATMENT EFFECTS OF SYNONYMS BIOCHEMICAL ACTION DEFICIENCY OF DEFICIENCY Thiamine Coenzyme in carbohydrate Neurologic (dry 3-5 mg/ (vitamin B1) metabolism beriberi): irritability, day PO Nucleic acid peripheral neuritis, thiamine synthesis muscle tenderness, for 6wk Neurotransmitter synthesis ataxia Cardiac (wet beriberi): tachycardia, edema, cardiomegaly, cardiac failure Riboflavin (vitamin B2) Constituent of flavoprotein Glossitis, enzymes important photophobia, in redox reactions: acrimation, amino acid, fatty acid, corneal 3-10 mg/ day PO riboflavin and carbohydrate vascularization, metabolism and cellular poor growth, respiration cheilosis CAUSES OF DEFICIENCY Polished rice- based diets Malabsorptive states Severe malnutrition Malignancies Alcoholism Severe malnutrition Malabsorptive states Prolonged treatment with phenothiazines, orobenecid, or OCPs Predominantly maize-based diets Anorexia nervosa Carcinoid syndrome DIETARY SOURCES Meat, especially pork; fish; liver Rice (unmilled), wheat germ; enriched cereals; legumes Milk, milk products, eggs, fortified cereals, green vegetables Meat, fish, poultry Cereals, legumes, green vegetables Niacin (vitamin B3) Constituent of NAD and NADP, important in respiratory chain, fatty acid synthesis, cell differentiation, and DNA processing Pell dira manifesting 50-30P0g/ symmetric scaly niacin dermatitis in sun- exposed areas, sym pours ofic disorientation and delirium Pyridoxine Constituent of coenzymes Irritability, (vitamin B6) for amino acid and convulsions, glycogen metabolism, hypochromic heme synthesis, steroid anemia action, neurotransmitter Failure to thrive synthesis Oxaluria 5-25 mg/ day PO for deficiency states 100 mg IM or IV for pyridoxine seizures Prolonged treatment with INH, penicillamine, OCPs Fortified ready-to- eat cereals, meat, fish, poultry, liver, bananas, rice, potatoes DIETARY REFERENCE INTAKES BY AGE RDA* EAR** 0-6 mo: 0.2 mg/day 1-3yr: 7-12 mo: 0.3 mg/ 0.4 mg/day day 4-8 уг: 0.5 1-3 yr: 0.5 mg/day mg/day 4-8 yr: 0.6 mg/day 9-13 yr: 0.7 9-13 yr: 0.9 mg/day mg/day 14-18 yr: 14-18 yr: Females: 1.0 mg/ Females: 0.9 day mg/day Males: 1.2 mg/day Males: 1.0 mg/day 0-6 mo: 0.3 mg/day 1-3yr: 7-12 mo: 0.4 mg/ 0.4 mg/day day 4-8 уг: 0.5 1-3 yr: 0.5 mg/day mg/day 4-8 yr: 0.6 mg/day 9-13 yr: 0.8 9-13 yr: 0.9 mg/day mg/day 14-18 yr: 14-18 yr: Females: 1.0 mg/ Females: 0.9 day mg/day Males: 1.3 mg/day Males: 1.1 mg/day 0-6 mo: 2 mg/day 1-3yr: 5 mg/ 7-12 mo: 4 mg/day 1-3 yr: 6 mg/day 4-8 yr: 6 mg/ 4-8 yr: 8 mg/day 9-13 yr: 12 mg/day 9-13 yr: 9 14-18 yr: mg/day Females: 14 mg/ 14-18 yr: Females: 11 Males: 16 mg/day mg/day Males: 12 mg/day 0-6 mo: 0.1 mg/day 1-3yr: 7-12 mo: 0.3 mg/ 0.4 mg/day day 4-8 yr: 0.5 1-3 yr: 0.5 mg/day mg/day 4-8 yr: 0.6 mg/day 9-13 yr: 0.8 9-13 yr: 1.0 mg/day mg/day 14-18 yr: 14-18 yr: Females: 1.2 mg/ Females: 1.0 day mg/day Males: 1.3 mg/day Males: 1.1 mg/day 

Chapter 67 • Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess 457 Table 67.1 Water-Soluble Vitamins-cont'd NAMES AND EFFECTS OF SYNONYMS BIOCHEMICAL ACTION DEFICIENCY Biotin Cofactor for carboxylases, Scaly periorificial (vitamin B7) important in dermatitis, gluconeogenesis, fatty conjunctivitis, acid and amino acid alopecia, lethargy, metabolism hypotonia, and withdrawn behavior TREATMENT OF DEFICIENCY 1-10 mg/day PO biotin Pantothenic Component of coenzyme Experimentally acid A and acyl carrier protein produced (vitamin B5) involved in fatty acid metabolism deficiency in humans: irritability, fatigue, numbness, paresthesias (burning feet syndrome), muscle cramps Folic acid (vitamin B9) Coenzymes in amino acid and nucleotide metabolism as an acceptor and donor of 1-carbon units Megaloblastic anemia Growth stunting, glossitis Neural tube defects in progeny CAUSES OF DIETARY DEFICIENCY SOURCES Consumption Liver, organ of raw eggs meats, fruits EAR** Not established for prolonged periods Parenteral nutrition with DIETARY REFERENCE INTAKES BY AGE RDA* 0-6 mo: 5 g/day 7-12 mo: 6 ug/day 1-3 yr: 8 4g/day 4-8 yr: 12 g/day 9-13 yr: 20 pg/day 14-18 yr: 25 ug/day infusates lacking biotin Valproate therapy Isolated Beef, organ 0-6 mo: 1.7 mg/day Not deficiency meats, 7-12 mo: 1.8 mg/ established extremely rare poultry, in humans seafood, egg 1-3 yr: 2 mg/day yolk 4-8 yr: 3 mg/day Yeast, 9-13 yr: 4 mg/day soybeans, 14-18 yr: 5 mg/day mushrooms Cobalamin (vitamin B12) As deoxyadenosylcobalamin, acts as cofactor for lipid and carbohydrate metabolism As methylcobalamin, important for conversion of homocysteine to methionine and folic acid metabolism Important for collagen synthesis, metabolism of cholesterol and neurotransmitters Antioxidant functions and nonheme iron absorption 0.5-1 mg/day Malnutrition PO folic Malabsorptive acid states Malignancies Hemolytic anemias Anticonvulsant therapy Megaloblastic 500-1,000 mg Vegan diets anemia, irritability, IM or oral Malabsorptive developmental vitamin B12 states delay, Crohn disease developmental Intrinsic factor regression, deficiency involuntary pernicious movements, anemia) hyperpigmentation Enriched cereals, beans, leafy vegetables, citrus fruits, papaya 0-6 mo: 65 ug/day 1-3yr: 7-12 mo: 80 pg/day 120 pg/day 1-3 yr: 150 pg/day 4-8 yr: 160 4-8 yr: 200 pg/day ug/day 9-13 yr: 300 kg/day 9-13 yr: 250 14-18 yr: 400 g/ ug/day day 14-18 уг: 330 ug/day Organ meats, 0-6 mo: 0.4 pg/day 1-3yr: 0.7 pg/ seafood, 7-12 mo: 0.5 pg/ poultry, egg day day 4-8 yr: 1.0 yolk, milk, 1-3 yr: 0.9 pg/day ng/day fortified 4-8 yr: 1.2 mg/day 9-13 yr: 1.5 ready-to-eat 9418yr 24g/day 149/: 2.0 cereals 14-18 yr: 2.4 pg/ ng/day day ng/day Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) Scurvy manifesting as irritability, tenderness and swelling of legs, bleeding 100-200 mg/ day PO ascorbic acid for up to 3 mo gums, petechiae, Predominantly milk-based non-human milk) diets Severe malnutrition ecchymoses, follicular hyperkeratosis, and poor wound Citrus fruits and fruit juices, peppers, berries, melons, tomatoes, cauliflower, leafy green vegetables healing 0-6 mo: 40 mg/day 1-3yr: 13 mg/ 7-12 mo: 50 mg/ day day 4-8 yr: 22 1-3 yr: 15 mg/day mg/day 4-8 yr: 25 mg/day 9-13 yr: 39 9-13 yr: 45 mg/day mg/day 14-18 yr: 14-18 yr: Females: 65 mg/ Females: 56 day mg/day Males: 75 mg/day Males: 63 mg/day *For healthy breastfed infants, the values represent adequate intakes (Al), that is, the mean intake of apparently "normal" infants. For biotin and pantothenic acid also, the values represent Al, as the RDA has not been established. **Values have not been established for infants (0-12 mo). PO, Orally; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; INH, isoniazid; NAD, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADP, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; OCP, oral contraceptive pill; RDA, recommended dietary allowance (average daily nutrient intake level estimated to meet the requirements of nearly all the healthy individuals); EAR, estimated average requirement (average daily nutrient intake level estimated to meet the requirements of 50% of the healthy individuals). From The National Academies Press. Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline (https://www nap.edu/catalog/6015/dietary-reference-intakes-for-thiamin-riboflavin-niacin-vitamin-b6-folate-vitamin-b12-pantothenic-acid-biotin-and-choline) and Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and Carotenoids (https://www.nap.edu/catalog/9810/dietary-reference-intakes-for-vitamin-c-vitamin-e-selenium-and-carotenoids) 67.1 Thiamine (Vitamin B1) H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah Thiamine diphosphate, the active form of thiamine, serves as a cofac- tor for several enzymes involved in carbohydrate catabolism such as pyruvate dehydrogenase, transketolase, and a-ketoglutarate. These enzymes also play a role in the hexose monophosphate shunt that generates nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) and pentose for nucleic acid synthesis. Thiamine is also required for the synthesis of acetylcholine (ACh) and y-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which have important roles in nerve conduction. Thia- mine is absorbed efficiently in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and 

458 Part V • Nutrition Table 67.2 Genetic Pathogenic Variants Affecting Thiamine Metabolism DISEASE TRMA/Rogers syndrome VARIANT SLC19A2 PROTEIN THTR1 AGE AT ONSET Birth to adolescence Biotin-thiamine- responsive basal ganglia disease SLC19A3 THTR2 Birth to adolescence Amish lethal microcephaly/ THMD3 SLC25A19 Mitochondrial TPP Birth carrier Thiamine metabolism SLC25A19 MTPC dysfunction syndrome 4/THMD4 (progressive polyneuropathy type) Thiamine metabolism TPK1 dysfunction syndrome 5 (episodic encephalopathy type) THMD5 Adolescence CLINICAL SYMPTOMS Megaloblastic anemia, diabetes mellitus, sensorineural deafness, optic atrophy, congenital heart defects, short stature ophthalmoplegia, dysphagia, gait ataxia, bilateral lesions of the basal ganglia Episodic encephalopathy associated with lactic acidosis and alpha-ketoglutaric aciduria, microcephaly, delayed psychomotor development, seizures, increased urinary lactate Episodic encephalopathy associated with febrile illness, transient neurologic dysfunction, residual weakness, progressive axonal polyneuropathy, bilateral striatal degeneration MANAGEMENT (DOSE) Thiamine (50-200 mg/ day) Biotin (5-10 mg/kg/day), thiamine (up to 40 mg/ kg/day) Phenobarbital (for seizures) and physical therapy High-fat diet High-dose (600 mg/day) thiamine may prevent acute episodes Thiamine phosphokinase Carly childhood Episodic encephalopathy (Leigh-like) associated with high serum and CSF Oral thiamine (100-200 mg/day) lactate with progressive neurologic and motor dysfunctions (gait disturbances, ataxia, dystonia, and spasticity, which, in some cases, may result in loss of ability to walk triggered by infections Cognitive function usually preserved; some developmental delay; some patients may recover from some neurologic deficits; in others, the outcome is fatal. Modified from Dhir S, Tarasenko M, Napoli E, Giulivi C. Neurological, psychiatric, and biochemical aspects of thiamine deficiency in children and adults. Front Psychiatry. 2019;10:207, Table 1. may be deficient in persons with GI or liver disease. The require- ment of thiamine is increased when carbohydrates are taken in large amounts and during periods of increased metabolism, such as fever, muscular activity, hyperthyroidism, pregnancy, and lactation. Alco- hol affects various aspects of thiamine transport and uptake, con- tributing to the deficiency in alcoholics. Pork (especially lean), fish, and poultry are good dietary sources of thiamine. Main sources of thiamine for vegetarians are rice, oat, wheat, and legumes. Most ready-to-eat breakfast cereals are enriched with thiamine. Thiamine is water soluble and heat labile; most of the vitamin is lost when the rice is repeatedly washed and the cooking water is discarded. The breast milk of a well-nourished mother provides adequate thiamine; breastfed infants of thiamine- deficient mothers are at risk for deficiency. Thiamine antagonists (coffee, tea, carbonated caffeinated beverages) and thiaminases (fermented fish) may contribute to thiamine deficiency. Most infants and older children consuming a balanced diet obtain an adequate intake of thiamine from food and do not require supplements. THIAMINE DEFICIENCY Deficiency of thiamine is associated with severely malnourished states, including malignancy and after surgery. The disorder (or spectrum of disorders) is classically associated with a diet consisting largely of polished rice (oriental beriberi); it can also arise if highly refined wheat flour forms a major part of the diet, in persons with alcoholic use disorder, and in food faddists (occidental beriberi). Thi- amine deficiency has often been reported from inhabitants of refugee camps consuming the polished rice-based monotonous diets and in breastfed infants of mothers on a predominantly polished rice-based diet. Low thiamine concentrations are also noted during critical Thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia (TRMA) syn- drome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by megaloblastic anemia, diabetes mellitus, and sensorineural hear- ing loss, responding in varying degrees to thiamine treatment. The syndrome occurs because of pathologic variants of the SLC19A2 gene, encoding a thiamine transporter protein, leading to abnor- mal thiamine transportation and cellular vitamin deficiency (Table 67.2). Another dependency state, biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease (BTBGD), results from pathologic variants of the SLC19A3 gene (see Table 67.2). It classically presents in chil- dren with recurrent episodes of subacute encephalopathy mani- festing as lethargy, dystonia, rigidity, dysphagia, and convulsions and responds to combined treatment with biotin (5-10 mg/kg/day) and thiamine (up to 40 mg/kg/day). An infantile form manifesting with acidosis, lethargy, poor feeding, and infantile spasms is also described. Other genetic disorders are noted in Table 67.2. Thia- mine and related vitamins may improve the outcome in children with Leigh encephalomyelopathy. 

Chapter 67 • Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess 459 Clinical Manifestations Thiamine deficiency can develop within 2-3 months of a deficient intake. Early symptoms of thiamine deficiency are nonspecific, such as fatigue, apathy, irritability, depression, drowsiness, poor mental concentration, anorexia, nausea, and abdominal discomfort. As the condition progresses, more specific manifestations of beriberi develop, such as peripheral neuritis (manifesting as tingling, burn- paresthesias of the toes and feet), decreased deep tendon reflexes, loss of vibration sense, tenderness and cramping of the leg psychologic disturbances. Patients can have ptosis of the eyelids and atrophy of the optic nerve. Hoarseness or aphonia caused by paralysis of the laryngeal nerve is a character- istic sign. Muscle atrophy and tenderness of the nerve trunks are followed by ataxia, loss of coordination, and loss of deep sensation. Later signs include increased intracranial pressure, meningismus, and coma. The clinical picture of nutritional thiamine deficiency is usually divided into a dry (neuritic) type and a wet (cardiac) type. The disease is wet or dry depending on the amount of fluid that accumulates in the body because of cardiac and renal dysfunc- tion, even though the exact cause for this edema is unknown. Many cases of thiamine deficiency show a mixture of both features and are more properly termed thiamine deficiency with cardiopathy and peripheral neuropathy. A fulminant form of beriberi (Shoshin beriberi) manifesting acutely with severe metabolic acidosis, hypo- tension, and cardiogenic shock has also been described. The classic clinical triad of Wernicke encephalopathy-men- tal status changes, ocular signs, and ataxia-is rarely reported in young children with severe deficiency secondary to malignancies or feeding of defective formula. An epidemic of life- threatening thiamine deficiency was seen in infants fed a defective soy-based formula that had undetectable thiamine levels. Manifes- tations included emesis, lethargy, restlessness, ophthalmoplegia, abdominal distention, developmental delay, failure to thrive (mal- nutrition), lactic acidosis, nystagmus, diarrhea, apnea, seizures, and auditory neuropathy. An acute presentation with tachycardia, aphonia/hoarse cry, pulmonary hypertension, and severe metabolic acidosis responding to parenteral thiamine has been reported in infants of mothers consuming polished and frequently washed rice. Death from nutritional thiamine deficiency usually is secondary to cardiac involvement. The initial signs are cyanosis and dyspnea, but tachycardia, enlargement of the liver, loss of consciousness, and convulsions can develop rapidly. The heart, especially the right side, is enlarged. The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows an increased QT interval, inverted T waves, and low voltage. These changes, as well as the cardiomegaly, rapidly revert to normal with treatment, but without prompt treatment, cardiac failure can develop rapidly and result in death. In fatal cases of beriberi, lesions are principally located in the heart, peripheral nerves, subcutaneous tissue, and serous cavities. The heart is dilated, and fatty degeneration of the myocardium is common. Generalized edema or edema of the legs, serous effusions, and venous engorgement are often present. Degen- eration of myelin and axon cylinders of the peripheral nerves, with Wallerian degeneration beginning in the distal locations, is also common, particularly in the lower extremities. Lesions in the brain include vascular dilation and hemorrhage. Diagnosis The diagnosis is often suspected based on clinical setting and com- patible symptoms. A high index of suspicion in children present- ing with unexplained cardiac failure may sometimes be lifesaving. Objective biochemical tests of thiamine status include measure- ment of erythrocyte transketolase activity and the thiamine pyro- phosphate effect. The biochemical diagnostic criteria of thiamine deficiency consist of low erythrocyte transketolase activity and high thiamine pyrophosphate effect (normal range: 0-14%). Urinary excretion of thiamine or its metabolites (thiazole or pyrimidine) Table 67.3 Suggested Criteria for the Diagnosis of Inherited Thiamine Defects with Prominent Neurologic Involvement REQUIRED 1. Clinical criteria a. SLCI9A3: Acute or recurrent episodes of encephalopathy (decreased consciousness, irritability) with two or more of the following: (a) dystonia, (b) hypotonia, (c) bulbar dysfunction, (d) ataxia, and (e) seizures. Of note, 16% of patients may have an insidious onset of symptoms (psychomotor regression, clumsy or abnormal gait, and stiff limbs). SLC25A19: Acute or recurrent episodes of encephalopathy with (a) progressive peripheral neuropathy or (b) severe congenital microcephaly with brain malformations. TPK1: Acute or recurrent episodes of encephalopathy, with two or more of the following: (a) dystonia, (b) hypotonia, (c) ataxia, (d) seizures, and (e) developmental delay. Of note, some patients may have a nonepisodic early-onset global developmental delay. a. Normal total thiamine blood levels b. Low free-thiamine in CSF and/or fibroblasts (SLC19A3) Low TPP in blood, muscle, and/or fibroblasts (TPK1) d. High excretion of alpha-ketoglutaric acid in urine (common in TPK1 and SLC25A19, rare in SLC19A3) 3. Radiologic criteria a. MRI pattern compatible with Leigh syndrome (SLC19A3, SLC25A19, TPK1) or Wernicke encephalopathy (SLC19A3) i. SLC19A3: Symmetric T2W hyperintensity of caudate, putamen, cortico/subcortical areas, and/or ventromedial thalamus. No involvement of mammillary bodies. Diffuse T2W hyperintensity of brain white matter (single adult patient reported). ii. SLC25A19: Symmetric T2W hyperintensity in the caudate and putamen. iii. TPK1: Symmetric T2W hyperintensity in basal ganglia and cerebellum (dentate nuclei). 4. Therapeutic criteria a. Clinical improvement after thiamine supplementation SUPPORTIVE 1. Consanguinity 2. Trigger event (e.g., infection, vaccination, trauma, intense physical activity) 3. Absence of predisposing factors of beriberi or Wernicke encephalopathy 4. Absence of systemic features of mitochondrial disease (cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia/conduction defects, renal tubulopathy, or dysmorphic features) 5. Increased lactate in blood and/or CS or presence of a lactate peak on MRS 6. Normal OXPHOS and PDHc activity in muscle and fibroblast CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; OXPHOS, oxidative phosphorylation: PDHc, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy; TPP, thiamine pyrophosphate; T2W, T2-weighted. From Marcé-Grau A, Marti-Sánchez L, Baide-Mairena H, Ortigoza-Escobar JD, Pérez- Dueñas B. Genetic defects of thiamine transport and metabolism: A review of clinical phenotypes, genetics, and functional studies. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2019;42(4):581-597, Table 3, p. 586. after an oral loading dose of thiamine may also be measured to help identify the deficiency state. A diagnostic approach to genetic thia- mine deficiencies is noted in Table 67.3. MRI changes of nutritional and genetic thiamine deficiency in infants are characterized by bilateral symmetric hyperintensities of the basal ganglia and frontal lobe, in addition to the lesions in the mammillary bodies, periaque- ductal region, and thalami described in adults (Fig. 67.1). 

460 Part V • Nutrition SLC19A3 SLC25A19 TPK1 Fig. 67.1 MRI patterns in pa- tients with inherited thiamine de- fects. SLC19A3, Axial and coronal T2-weighted images show bilat- eral symmetric involvement of the putamen and thalamus along with patchy cortical and subcortical hy- perintensities. SLC25A19, Axial T2-weighted and T1-weighted im- ages show cystic necrosis of the caudate and putamen. TPK1, Axial and coronal T2-weighted spin-echo images show involvement of the posterior putamen and dentate nuclei (gray arrow). (Modified from Ortigoza-Escobar Alfadhel M, Molero-Luis M, et l. Thiamine deficiency in childhood with atten- tion to genetic causes: Survival and outcome predictors. Ann Neurol. 2017;82(3):317-330, Fig. 3, p. 322.) Prevention A maternal diet containing sufficient amounts of thiamine prevents thiamine deficiency in breastted infants, and infant formulas mar- keted in all developed countries provide recommended levels of intake. During complementary feeding, adequate thiamine intake can be achieved with a varied diet that includes meat and enriched or whole-grain cereals. When the staple cereal is polished rice, special efforts need to be made to include legumes and/or nuts in the ration. Thiamine and other vitamins can be retained in rice by parboiling, a process of steaming the rice in the husk before mill- ing. Improvement in cooking techniques, such as not discarding the water used for cooking, minimal washing of grains, and reduction of cooking time, helps to minimize the thiamine losses during the preparation of food. Thiamine supplementation should be ensured during total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Treatment In the absence of GI disturbances, oral administration of thiamine is effective. Children with cardiac failure, convulsions, or coma should be given 10-50 mg of thiamine intramuscularly (IM) or intravenously (IV) daily for the first week. This treatment should then be followed by 3-5 mg/day of thiamine orally (PO) for at least 6 weeks. The response is dramatic in infants and in those having predominantly cardiovascu- lar manifestations, whereas the neurologic response is slow and often incomplete. Epilepsy, mental disability, and language and auditory problems of varying degrees have been reported in survivors of severe infantile thiamine deficiency. Patients with beriberi often have other B-complex vitamin defi- ciencies; therefore all other B-complex vitamins should also be administered. Treatment of TRMA syndrome and other genetic pathogenic variants of thiamine metabolism require higher dos- ages (Table 67.2). The anemia responds well to thiamine admin- istration, and insulin for associated diabetes mellitus can also be discontinued in many patients with TRMA syndrome. Patients with BTBGD need lifelong supplementation. THIAMINE TOXICITY There are no reports of adverse effects from consumption of excess thiamine by ingestion of food or supplements. A few isolated cases of pruritus and anaphylaxis have been reported in patients after paren- teral administration of vitamin B1. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 67.2 Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah Riboflavin is part of the structure of the coenzymes flavin adenine dinu- cleotide (FAD) and flavin mononucleotide, which participate in oxidation- reduction (redox) reactions in numerous metabolic pathways and in energy production via the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Specific trans- porter proteins direct riboflavin intracellularly for these functions. Ribo- flavin is stable to heat but is destroyed by light. Milk and dairy products, eggs, organ meats, legumes, and mushrooms are rich dietary sources of riboflavin. Most commercial cereals, flours, and breads are enriched with riboflavin. 

Chapter 67 • Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess 461 RIBOFLAVIN DEFICIENCY The causes of riboflavin deficiency (ariboflavinosis) are mainly related to malnourished and malabsorptive states, including GI infections. Treatment with some drugs, such as probenecid, phenothiazine, doxo- rubicin, or oral contraceptives (OCs), can also cause the deficiency. Phototherapy for hyperbilirubinemia can contribute to deficiency as the side chain of the vitamin is photochemically destroyed because it is involved in the photosensitized oxidation of bilirubin to more polar excretable compounds. Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome (BVVLS) and Fazio-Londe syndrome are clinically overlapping conditions related to riboflavin transporter deficiency (RTD). Pathologic variants (autosomal reces- sive) of the SLC52A1 (type 1), SLC52A2 (type 2), and SLC52A3 (type 3) genes, which encode intestinal human riboflavin transporter proteins, have been demonstrated in these disorders characterized by progressive neurologic deterioration, peripheral neuropathy, hypotonia, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss (usually the first symptom), optic atrophy, pontobulbar palsy, and respiratory insufficiency. Age of onset is vari- able; the later the onset, the milder the symptoms. Treatment with high doses (10-80 mg/kg/day) of riboflavin lead to clinical improvement in the majority of cases, especially if treated early in the disease course. Prophylaxis with riboflavin has been demonstrated to be effective in the reduction of frequency of headache in adult migraine; the evidence is insufficient in children and adolescents. Clinical Manifestations Clinical features of nutritional riboflavin deficiency include cheilosis, glos- sitis, keratitis, conjunctivitis, photophobia, lacrimation, corneal vascu- larization, and seborrheic dermatitis. Cheilosis begins with pallor at the angles of the mouth and progresses to thinning and maceration of the epi- thelium, leading to fissures extending radially into the skin (Fig. 67.2). In glossitis the tongue becomes smooth, with loss of papillary structure (Fig. 67.3). Normochromic, normocytic anemia may also be seen because of the impaired erythropoiesis. A low riboflavin content of the maternal diet has been linked to congenital heart defects, but the evidence is weak. Diagnosis Most often, the diagnosis is based on the clinical features of angular cheilosis in a malnourished child, who responds promptly to riboflavin supplementa- tion. A functional test of riboflavin status is done by measuring the activity of erythrocyte glutathione reductase (EGR), with and without the addition of FAD. An EGR activity coefficient (ratio of EGR activity with added FAD to EGR activity without FAD) of >1.4 is used as an indicator of deficiency. Urinary excretion of riboflavin <30 4g/24 hr also suggests low intake. Riboflavin transporter deficiency may be detected by genetic testing. Prevention Table 67.1 lists the recommended daily allowance of riboflavin for infants, children, and adolescents. Adequate consumption of milk, milk products, and eggs prevents riboflavin deficiency. Fortification of cereal products is helpful for those who follow vegan diets or who are consuming inadequate amounts of milk products for other reasons. Treatment Treatment includes oral administration of 3-10 mg/day of ribofla- vin, often as an ingredient of a vitamin B-complex mix. The child should also be given a well-balanced diet, including milk and milk products. RIBOFLAVIN TOXICITY No adverse effects associated with riboflavin intake from food or sup- plements have been reported, and the upper safe limit for consumption has not been established. Although the photosensitizing property of vitamin B2 suggests some potential risks, limited absorption in high- intake situations precludes such concerns. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Fig. 67.2 Clinical photograph of a child showing angular cheilosis with ulceration and crusting in riboflavin deficiency. (Courtesy National Insti- tute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research, Hyderabad, India.) Fig. 67.3 Papillary atrophy, inflammation, and ulceration of the tongue as seen in riboflavin deficiency. (From Zappe HA, Nuss S, Becker <, et al. Riboflavin deficiency in Baltistan. http://www.rzuser.uni-heidelb erg.de/%7Ecn6/baltista/ribof|_e.htm.) 67.3 Niacin (Vitamin B3) H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah Niacin (nicotinamide or nicotinic acid) forms part of two cofactors, nico- tinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleo- tide phosphate (NADP), which are important in several biologic reactions, including the respiratory chain, fatty acid and steroid synthesis, cell differen- tiation, and DNA processing. Niacin is rapidly absorbed from the stomach and the intestines and can also be synthesized from tryptophan in the diet. Major dietary sources of niacin are meat, fish, and poultry for nonvegetar- ians and cereals, legumes, and green leafy vegetables for vegetarians. Enriched and fortified cereal products and legumes also are major contributors to niacin intake. Milk and eggs contain little niacin but are good sources of tryptophan, which can be converted to NAD (60 mg tryptophan = 1 mg niacin). NIACIN DEFICIENCY Pellagra, the classic niacin defciency disease, occurs chiefly in popula- tions where corn (maize), a poor source of tryptophan, is the major food- stuff. A severe dietary imbalance, such as in anorexia nervosa and in war or famine conditions, also can cause pellagra. Pellagra is rare outside the African subcontinent; however, consumption of a highly restrictive diet, such as in autism, has led to some resurgence in high-income countries. Pellagra can also develop in conditions associated with disturbed tryp- tophan metabolism, such as carcinoid syndrome and Hartnup disease. 

462 Part V • Nutrition B Fig. 67.4 A, demarcated, Symmetric, well- erythematous, eroded plaques with desquamation over hands and forearms. B, Brownish plaques with desquamation in the distribution of neck collar (Casal neck- lace) because of pellagra in a child with autism on highly restrictive diet. (From Zaenglein A, Martin A, Carlson L, Williams KE. Pellagra secondary to selective eating in a child with autism. Pediatr Dermatol. 2020;37:698-700.) Clinical Manifestations The early symptoms of pellagra are vague: anorexia, lassitude, weak- ness, burning sensation, numbness, and dizziness. After a long period of deficiency, the classic triad of dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia appears. Dermatitis, the most characteristic manifestation of pellagra, can develop suddenly or insidiously and may be initiated by irritants, including intense sunlight. The lesions first appear as symmetric areas of erythema on exposed surfaces, resembling sunburn, and might go unrecognized. The lesions are usually sharply demarcated from the surrounding healthy skin, and their distribution can change frequently. The lesions on the hands and feet often have the appearance of a glove or stocking (Fig. 67.4A). Similar demarcations can also occur around the neck (Casal necklace) (see Fig. 67.4B). In some cases, vesicles and bullae develop (wet type). In others there may be suppuration beneath the scaly, crusted epidermis; in still others the swelling can disappear after a short time, followed by desquamation (Fig. 67.5). The healed parts of the skin might remain pigmented. The cutaneous lesions may be preceded by or accompanied by stomatitis, glossitis, vomiting, and diarrhea. Swelling and redness of the tip of the tongue and its lateral margins is often followed by intense redness, even ulceration, of the entire tongue and the papillae. Central nervous system symptoms include depression, disorientation, insomnia, and delirium. The classic symptoms of pellagra usually are not well developed in infants and young children, but anorexia, irritability, anxiety, and apathy are common. Young patients might also have sore tongues and lips and usually have dry scaly skin. Diarrhea and constipation can alternate, and anemia can occur. Children who have pellagra often have evidence of other nutritional deficiency diseases. Because of lack of a good functional test to evaluate niacin status, the diagnosis of deficiency is usually made from the physical signs of glossi- tis, GI symptoms, and a symmetric dermatitis. Rapid clinical response to niacin is an important confirmatory test. A decrease in the concentration and/or a change in the proportion of the niacin metabolites N' -methyl- nicotinamide and 2-pyridone in the urine provide biochemical evidence of deficiency and can be seen before the appearance of overt signs of defi- ciency. Histopathologic changes from the affected skin include dilated blood vessels without significant inflammatory infiltrates, ballooning of the keratinocytes, hyperkeratosis, and epidermal necrosis. Fig. 67.5 Clinical manifestations of niacin deficiency before (A) and after (B) therapy. (From Weinsier RL, Morgan SL. Fundamentals of Clini- cal Nutrition. St Louis: Mosby; 1993:99.) Adequate intake of niacin is easily met by consumption of a diet that con- sists of a variety of foods and includes meat, eggs, milk, and enriched or fortified cereal products. The dietary reference intake (DRI) is expressed in milligram niacin equivalents (NE) in which 1 mg NE = 1 mg niacin or 60 mg tryptophan. The DRI is summarized in Table 67.1. 

Treatment Children usually respond rapidly to treatment. A liberal and varied diet should be supplemented with 50-300 mg/day of niacin; in severe cases or in patients with poor intestinal absorption, 100 mg may be given IV. The diet should also be supplemented with other vitamins, especially other B-complex vitamins. Sun exposure should be avoided during the active phase of pellagra, and the skin lesions may be covered with soothing applications. Other coexisting nutrient deficiencies such as iron-deficiency anemia should be treated. Even after successful treat- ment, the diet should continue to be monitored to prevent recurrence. NIACIN TOXICITY No toxic effects are associated with the intake of naturally occurring nia- cin in foods. Shortly after the ingestion of large doses of nicotinic acid taken as a supplement or a pharmacologic agent, a person often experi- ences a burning, tingling, and itching sensation, as well as flushing on the face, arms, and chest. Large doses of niacin also can have nonspecific GI effects and can cause cholestatic jaundice or hepatotoxicity. Tolerable upper intake levels for children are 10 mg/day for 1-3 years, 15 mg/day for 4-8 years, 20 mg/day for 9-13 years, and 30 mg/day for 14-18 years. Visit Elsevier eBookst at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 67.4 Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxine) H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah Vitamin B6 includes a group of closely related compounds: pyri- pyridoxamine, and their phosphorylated derivatives. Pyridoxal 5 -phosphate (PLP) and, to a lesser extent, pyridoxamine phosphate function as coenzymes for many enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism, neurotransmitter synthesis, glycogen metabolism, and steroid action. If vitamin B6 is lacking, glycine metabolism can lead to oxaluria. The major excretory prod- uct in the urine is 4-pyridoxic acid. The vitamin B6 content of human milk and infant formulas is ade- quate. Good food sources of the vitamin include fortified ready-to-eat cereals, meat, fish, poultry, liver, bananas, rice, and certain vegetables. Large losses of the vitamin can occur during high-temperature pro- cessing of foods or milling of cereals, whereas parboiling of rice pre- VITAMIN B6 DEFICIENCY Because of the importance of vitamin B6 in amino acid metabo- lism, high protein intake can increase the requirement for the vita- min; the recommended daily allowances are sufficient to cover the expected range of protein intake in the population. The risk of deficiency is increased in persons taking medications that inhibit the activity of vitamin B6 (e.g., isoniazid, penicillamine, cortico- steroids, phenytoin, carbamazepine), in young women taking oral progesterone-estrogen contraceptives, and in patients receiving maintenance dialysis. Clinical Manifestations irritability, seizures, vomiting, and failure to thrive. Peripheral neu- ritis is a feature of deficiency in adults but is not usually seen in chil- dren. EEG abnormalities have been reported in infants and in young adults in controlled depletion studies. Skin lesions include cheilo- sis, glossitis, and seborrheic dermatitis around the eyes, nose, and mouth. Microcytic anemia can occur in infants but is not common. Oxaluria, oxalic acid bladder stones, hyperglycinemia, lymphopenia, decreased antibody formation, and infections also are associated with vitamin B6 deficiency. Several types of vitamin B6 dependence syndromes, presum- ably resulting from errors in metabolism or transport of PLP or Chapter 67 • Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess 463 pyridoxine, respond to large doses of pyridoxine. These syndromes include pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, a vitamin B6-responsive anemia, xanthurenic aciduria, cystationinuria, and homocys- tinuria. Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy involves pathologic vari- ants in the ALDH7A1 gene causing deficiency of antiquitin, an enzyme involved in dehydrogenation of a-aminoadipic semialde- hyde. Pathologic variants of the genes PROSC, which encodes a PLP binding protein, and PNPO encoding for the pyridoxamine 5-phosphate oxidase enzyme also cause epilepsy responsive to PLP or high doses of pyridoxine. Neonatal epileptic encephalopa- thy and hypophosphatasia are associated with impaired import of PLP into the neuronal cells, and seizures occurring in these condi- tions also respond to pyridoxine therapy. The activity of aspartate (glutamic-oxaloacetic) transaminase (AST) and alanine (glutamic-pyruvic) transaminase (ALT) is low in vitamin B6 deficiency; tests measuring the activity of these enzymes before and after the addition of PLP may be useful as indicators of vitamin B6 status. Abnormally high xanthurenic acid excretion after tryptophan ingestion also provides evidence of deficiency. Plasma PLP assays are being used more often, but factors such as inflammation, renal func- tion, and hypoalbuminemia can influence the results. Ratios between substrate-product pairs (e.g., PAr index, 3-hydroxykynurenine/xanth- urenic acid ratio, oxoglutarate/glutamate ratio) may attenuate such influence. Quantification of a large number of metabolites, using mass spectrometry-based metabolomics, are being evaluated as functional biomarkers of pyridoxine status. Vitamin B6 deficiency or dependence should be suspected in all infants with seizures. If more common causes of infantile seizures have been eliminated, 100 mg of pyridoxine can be injected, with EEG mon- itoring if possible. If the seizure stops, vitamin B6 deficiency should be suspected. In older children, 100 mg of pyridoxine may be injected IM while the EEG is being recorded; a favorable response of the EEG sug- gests pyridoxine deficiency. Prevention Deficiency is unlikely in children consuming diets that meet their energy needs and contain a variety of foods. Parboiling of rice pre- vents the loss of vitamin B6 from the grains. The dietary reference intake for vitamin B6 is shown in Table 67.1. Infants whose moth- ers have received large doses of pyridoxine during pregnancy are at increased risk for seizures from pyridoxine dependence, and supple- ments during the first few weeks of life should be considered. Any child receiving a pyridoxine antagonist, such as isoniazid, should be carefully observed for neurologic manifestations; if these develop, vitamin B6 should be administered or the dose of the antagonist should be decreased. Treatment Intramuscular or intravenous administration of 100 mg of pyridoxine is used to treat convulsions caused by vitamin B6 deficiency. One dose should be sufficient if adequate dietary intake follows. For pyridoxine- dependent children, daily doses of 2-10 mg IM or 10-100 mg PO may be necessary. VITAMIN B6 TOXICITY Adverse effects have not been associated with high intakes of vita- min B6 from food sources. However, ataxia and sensory neuropathy have been reported with dosages above 200 mg/day in adults taking vitamin B6 supplements for several months. Tolerable upper intake levels for children are 30 mg/day for 1-3 years, 40 mg/day for 4-8 years, 60 mg/day for 9-13 years, and 80 mg/day for 14-18 years. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

464 Part V • Nutrition 67.5 Biotin H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah Biotin (vitamin B7 or vitamin H) functions as a cofactor for enzymes involved in carboxvlation reactions within and outside mitochon- dria. These biotin-dependent carboxylases catalyze key reactions in gluconeogenesis, fatty acid metabolism, and amino acid catabolism. There is limited information on the biotin content of foods; biotin is believed to be widely distributed, making a deficiency unlikely. Avidin found in raw egg whites acts as a biotin antagonist. Signs of biotin deficiency have been demonstrated in persons who con- sume large amounts of raw egg whites over long periods. Deficiency also has been described in infants and children receiving enteral and parenteral nutrition formula that lacks biotin. Treatment with valproic acid may result in a low biotinidase activity and/or biotin deficiency. The clinical findings of biotin deficiency include scaly periorifi- cial dermatitis, conjunctivitis, thinning of hair, and alopecia (Fig. 67.6). Central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities seen with biotin deficiency are lethargy, hypotonia, seizures, ataxia, and withdrawn behavior. Biotin deficiency can be successfully treated using 1-10 mg of biotin orally daily. The dietary reference intake for biotin is shown in Table 67.1. No toxic effects have been reported with very high doses. Biotin-responsive basal ganglia disease or biotin and thiamine- responsive basal ganglia disease is a rare childhood neurologic dis- order characterized by encephalopathy, seizures, extrapyramidal manifestations, altered signals in basal ganglia (bilateral involvement of caudate nuclei and putamen with sparing of globus pallidus) on MRI, and homozygous pathologic variation in the SLC19A3 gene (see Table 67.2). Chapter 105 describes conditions involving deficiencies in the enzymes holocarboxylase synthetase and biotinidase that respond to treatment with biotin. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 67.6 Folate H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah Folate exists in different chemical forms (Fig. 67.7). Folic acid (pteroyl- glutamic acid) is the synthetic form used in fortified foods and supple- ments. Naturally occurring folates in foods retain the core chemical B Fig. 67.6 A, Scalp rash in an infant with biotin deficiency before treat- ment with biotin. B, After 3 weeks of biotin treatment. (From Ito T, Ni- shie W, Fujita Y, et al. Infantile eczema caused by formula milk. Lancet. 2013;381:1958.) structure of pteroylglutamic acid but vary in their state of reduction, the single-carbon moiety they bear, or the length of the glutamate chain. These polyglutamates are broken down and reduced in the small intestine to dihydrofolates and tetrahydrofolates, which are involved as coenzymes in amino acid and nucleotide metabolism as acceptors and donors of 1-carbon units. Folate is important for CNS development during embryogenesis. Rice and cereals are rich dietary sources of folate, especially if enriched. Beans, leaty vegetables, and fruits such as oranges and papaya are good sources as well. The vitamin is readily absorbed from the small intestine and is broken down to monoglutamate derivatives by mucosal polyglutamate hydrolases. A high-affinity proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT) seems to be essential for absorption of folate in the intestine and in various cell types at low pH. The vitamin is also synthesized by colonic bacteria, and its half-life is prolonged by enterohepatic recirculation. FOLATE DEFICIENCY Because of folates role in protein, DNA, and RNA synthesis, the risk of deficiency is increased during periods of rapid growth or increased cellular metabolism. Folate deficiency can result from poor nutrient content in the diet, inadequate absorption (celiac dis- ease, inflammatory bowel disease), increased requirement (sickle cell anemia, psoriasis, malignancies, periods of rapid growth as in infancy and adolescence), or inadequate use (long-term treatment with high-dose nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; anticonvul- sants such as phenytoin and phenobarbital; methotrexate). Rare causes of deficiency are hereditary folate malabsorption, inborn errors of folate metabolism (methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase, methionine synthase reductase, and glutamate formiminotransfer- ase deficiencies), and cerebral folate deficiency. A loss-of-function pathologic variant in the gene coding for PCFT is the molecular basis for hereditary folate malabsorption. A high-affinity blocking autoantibody against the membrane-bound folate receptor in the choroid plexus preventing its transport across the blood-brain bar- rier is the likely cause of infantile cerebral folate deficiency. Clinical Manifestations Folic acid deficiency results in megaloblastic anemia and hyperseg- mentation of neutrophils. Nonhematologic manifestations include glossitis, listlessness, and growth retardation not related to anemia. An association exists between low maternal folic acid status and neu- ral tube defects, primarily spina bifida and anencephaly, and the role of periconceptional folic acid in their prevention is well established (see Chapter 503.1). Hereditary folate malabsorption manifests at 1-3 months of age with recurrent or chronic diarrhea, failure to thrive (malnutrition), oral ulcerations, neurologic deterioration, megaloblastic anemia, and oppor- tunistic infections. Cerebral folate deficiency manifests at 4-6 months of age with irritability, microcephaly, developmental delay, cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal tract signs, choreoathetosis, ballismus, seizures, and blindness as a result of optic atrophy. 5- Methyltetrahydrofolate levels are normal in serum and red blood cells (RBCs) but greatly depressed in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Diagnosis The diagnosis of folic acid deficiency anemia is made in the pres- ence of macrocytosis along with low folate levels in serum or RBCs. Normal serum folic acid levels are 5-20 ng/mL; with dehciency, levels are <3 ng/mL. Levels of RBC folate are a better indicator of chronic deficiency. The normal RBC folate level is 150-600 ng/mL of packed cells. The bone marrow is hypercellular because of erythroid hyper- plasia, and megaloblastic changes are prominent. Large, abnormal neutrophilic forms (giant metamyelocytes) with cytoplasmic vacu- olation also are seen. Cerebral folate deficiency is associated with low levels of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate in CSF and normal folate levels in the plasma 

Chapter 67 • Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess 465 Folic acid DHFR Food folates Serine - Glycine MTHFR 5-MTHF DHF DHFR THF SHMT MTHFD 5,10- ME-THF Folinic acid MTFS/ MTHFD 5,10- MY-THF 10-F- THF Homocysteine - methionine cycle Thymidine synthesis (pyrimidine) Purine biosynthesis Methylation reactions Fig. 67.7 Simplified scheme of folate metabolism; 5-MTHF is the predominant form in which dietary folate enters the circulation. Synthetic folic acid first has to be metabolized in two steps to the biologically active form THF, whereas the biologically derived folinic acid is already reduced and easily converted to 5,10-methenyl-THF. Serine is an important one carbon donor and allows entry of THF into the active one-carbon pool of intermediates by way of 5,10-methylene-THF, which functions as a cofactor for the synthesis of thymidine. 5,10-Methylene-THF can be metabolized to 5-MTHF for the remethylation of homocysteine to methionine, or it can be converted to 10-formyl-THF for use in purine synthe- sis. 1 DHF, dihydrofolate; DHFR, dihydrofolate reductase; THF, tetrahydrofolate; 5-MTHF, 5-methyltetrahydrofolate; SAM, S-adenosy|methionine; 5,10-ME-THF, 5,10-methylene-THF; 5,10-MYTHF, 5, 10-methenyl-THF; 10-F-THF, 10-formyl-THF; MTFS, 5, 10-methenyltetrahydrofolate synthetase. (From Lubout CMA, Goorden SMI, van den Hurk K, et al. Successful treatment of hereditary folate malabsorption with intramuscular folinic acid. Pediatr Neurol. 2020;102:62-66, Fig. 2, p. 64.) and RBCs. Pathologic variants of the PCFT gene are demonstrated in hereditary folate malabsorption. Prevention Breastfed infants have better folate nutrition than nonbreastfed infants throughout infancy. Consumption of folate-rich foods and food fortification programs are important to ensure adequate intake in children and in women of childbearing age. The dietary refer- ence intakes (DRIs) for folate are 65 ug of dietary folate equiva- lents (DFE) for infants 0-6 months of age and 80 ug of DFE for infants 6-12 months. (1 DFE = 1 ug food folate = 0.6 ug of folate from fortified food or as a supplement consumed with food = 0.5 ug of a supplement taken on an empty stomach.) For the DRIs in older children, see Table 67.1. All women desirous of becoming pregnant should consume 400-800 ug folic acid daily; the dose is 4 mg/day in those having delivered a child with a neural tube defect. To be effec- tive, supplementation should be started at least 1 month before con- ception and continued through the first 2-3 months of pregnancy. The benefit of periconceptional folate supplementation in preven- tion of congenital heart defects, orofacial clefts, childhood cancers, and autism spectrum disorders are unclear. Preconceptional folate supplementation continued throughout pregnancy may marginally reduce the risk of delivering a preterm or small-for-gestational-age infant. Providing iron and folic acid tablets for prevention of ane- mia in children and pregnant women is a routine strategy in at-risk populations. Mandatory fortification of cereal flours with folic acid coupled with health education programs has been associated with a substantial reduction in incidence of neural tube defects in many countries. Treatment When the diagnosis of folate deficiency is established, folic acid may be administered orally or parenterally at 0.5-1.0 mg/day. Folic acid therapy should be continued for 3-4 weeks or until a definite hemato- logic response has occurred. Maintenance therapy with 0.2 mg/day of folate is adequate. Prolonged treatment with oral or parenteral folinic acid is required in cerebral folate deficiency, and the response may be incomplete. High-dose intravenous folinic acid may help in refractory cases. Treatment of hereditary folate malabsorption may be possible with intramuscular folinic acid; some patients may respond to high- dose oral folinic acid therapy. FOLATE TOXICITY No adverse effects have been associated with consumption of the amounts of folate normally found in fortified foods. Tolerable upper intake levels for children are 300 ug/day for 1-3 years, 400 ug/ day for 4-8 years, 600 ug/day for 9-13 years, and 800 ug/day for 14- 18 years. Excessive intake of folate supplements might obscure and potentially delay the diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency. Massive doses given by injection have the potential to cause neurotoxicity. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

466 Part V • Nutrition 67.7 Vitamin B12 (Cobalamin) H.P.S. Sachdev and Dheeraj Shah Vitamin B12, in the form of deoxyadenosylcobalamin, functions as a cofactor for isomerization of methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA, an essential reaction in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. Methyl- cobalamin is another circulating form of vitamin B12 and is essential for methyl group transfer during the conversion of homocysteine to methionine. This reaction also requires a folic acid cofactor and is important for protein and nucleic acid biosynthesis. Vitamin B12 is important for hematopoiesis, CNS myelination, and mental and psy- chomotor development (Fig. 67.8). Dietary sources of vitamin B12 are almost exclusively from animal foods. Organ meats, muscle meats, seafood (mollusks, oysters, fish), poultry, and egg yolk are rich sources. Fortified ready-to-eat cereals and milk and their products are the important sources of the vitamin for vegetarians. Human milk is an adequate source for breastfeeding infants if the maternal serum B12 levels are adequate. Vitamin B12 is absorbed from ileum at alkaline pH after binding with intrinsic factor. Enteroepatic circulation, direct absorption, and synthesis by intesti- nal bacteria are additional mechanisms helping to maintain the vita- min B12 nutriture. VITAMIN B12 DEFICIENCY Deficiency of vitamin B12 caused by inadequate dietary intake occurs primarily in persons consuming strict vegetarian or vegan diets. Prevalence of vitamin B12 deficiency is high in predomi- nantly vegetarian or lactovegetarian populations. Breastfeeding infants of B12-deficient mothers are also at risk for significant defi- ciency. Malabsorption of Bie occurs in celiac disease, ileal resec- tions, Crohn disease, Helicobacter pylori infection, and autoimmune atrophic gastritis (pernicious anemia). Obesity, type 1 diabetes, and use of metformin and proton pump inhibitors histamine (H2) receptor antagonists and misuse of nitrous oxide-usually in the form of inhaling aerosol whipped cream (whippits) - may increase the risk of deficiency. Hereditary intrinsic factor deficiency and Imerslund-Gräsbeck disease are inborn errors of metabolism leading to vitamin B12 malabsorption. Pathologic variants of the hereditary intrinsic factor gene cause hereditary intrinsic factor deficiency, whereas pathologic variation in any of the two sub- units (cubilin and amnionless) of the intrinsic factor receptor cause Imerslund-Gräsbeck disease. Maternal vitamin B12 deficiency may produce neonatal B12 deficiency, which may be detected by ele- vated levels of homocysteine and methylmalonic acid on the new- Homocysteine MSR CbIG MS-MeCbl cblE cbIDv1 > Methionine HCFC1 cbIX MMADHC CbID cbIDv2 MMACHC- cob(Il) alamin cbic LMBD1 Н сы cblF cblJ DEAN TGIR TC Сы TC cob(ll)alamin ^ ATR cbIB AdoCbl CbIA Methylmalonyl-CoA - MMAA MCM-AdoCbl mut → Succinyl-CoA Fig. 67.8 Scheme of cobalamin (Cbl) metabolism. The sites affected by methylmalonyl-CoA mutase deficiency (mut) and inborn errors of cobala- do me able oil in, on attache ase so in predi the id dideries to sec lee in A MC A pro in the O, di order by (cblDv1), and cbID variant 2 (cblDv2) disorders are caused by defects in the MMADHC protein; cblE disorder is caused by defects in the methionine synthase reductase (MSR) protein; cbIG disorder by defects in the methionine synthase (MS) protein; cblJ disorder by pathologic variants in the ABCD4 protein; cblX disorder by pathologic variation in the HCFC1 protein, and the mut disorder by defects in methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MCM). The protein affected in the cblF disorder is unknown. MCM-AdoCbl, Holomethylmalonyl-CoA mutase (mutase with bound adenosylcobalamin); MS-cob(Il) alamin, methionine synthase with bound cob(Il)alamin; MS-MeCbl, holomethionine synthase (synthase with bound methylcobalamin); TC, transcobalamin. (From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015:318.) 

Chapter 67 • Vitamin B Complex Deficiencies and Excess 467 Fig. 67.9 MRI of the cervical spine illustrating a long segment of T2 hyperintensity involving the dorsal column of virtually the entire cervi- cal spinal cord consistent with a diagnosis of subacute combined de- generation from vitamin B12 deficiency. (From Stockton L, Simonsen C, Seago S. Nitrous oxide-induced vitamin B12 deficiency. Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent). 2017;30(2):171-172.) Clinical Manifestations The hematologic manifestations of vitamin B12 deficiency are similar to manifestations of folate deficiency and are discussed in Chapter 503.2. Irritability, hypotonia, developmental delay, devel- opmental regression, and involuntary movements (predominantly coarse tremors) are the common neurologic symptoms in infants. Older children with vitamin B12 deficiency may show poor growth and poor school performance, whereas sensory deficits, paresthe- sias, peripheral neuritis, and psychosis are seen in adolescents and adults (Fig. 67.9). Hyperpigmentation of the knuckles, palms, and soles is another common observation with B12 deficiency in chil- dren and adolescents (Fig. 67.10). Diagnosis See Chapter 503.2. Vitamin B12 deficiency may be present with vitamin B12 levels in the normal or low normal range and without macrocytosis. Ancillary testing of methylmalonic acid and homocysteine levels may enhance the diagnosis. Treatment The hematologic symptoms respond promptly to parenteral admin- istration of 250-1,000 ug vitamin B12. Children with severe defi- ciency and those with neurologic symptoms need repeated doses, daily or on alternate days in the first week, followed by weekly for the first 1-2 months and then monthly. Children with only hema- tologic presentation recover fully within 2-3 months, whereas those with neurologic disease need at least 6 months of therapy. Children with a continuing malabsorptive state and those with inborn errors of vitamin B12 malabsorption need lifelong treatment. Daily treat- ment with high-dose (500-1,000 mg) oral vitamin B12 preparations has also been shown to be equally effective in correcting biochemi- cal vitamin B12 deficiency in a few trials in children, but data are inadequate to support use of the oral route in children with neuro- logic manifestations and severe anemia. The sublingual route has recently been explored in infants and children and has been found to be effective in normalizing serum vitamin B12 levels. B Fig. 67.10 Hyperpigmentation of (A) knuckles and (B) soles in an ado- lescent female with severe anemia and vitamin B12 deficiency. Prevention Vitamin B12 dietary reference intakes (DRIs) are shown in Table 67.1. In pregnancy the DRI is 2.6 ug/day and in lactation 2.8 ug/ day. Pregnant and breastfeeding women should ensure an adequate consumption of animal products to prevent cobalamin deficiency in infants. Strict vegetarians, especially vegans, should ensure regu- lar consumption of vitamin B12. Food fortification with the vitamin helps to prevent deficiency in predominantly vegetarian popula- tions. Though metabolic derangements suggestive of vitamin B12 deficiency are present in a high proportion of infants and children from low-income country settings, routine supplementation with vitamin B12 does not seem to significantly improve their growth, development, or hemoglobin status. Toxicity Administration of therapeutic doses, both in oral and parenteral forms, is usually safe. Transient erythroderma and chromatu- ria have been reported with administration of adult-equivalent doses of intravenous hydroxycobalamin in a child. Acneiform eruptions, palpitations, headache, and insomnia have been occa- sionally reported in young adults receiving repeated high parenteral Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

468 Part V • Nutrition Chapter 68 Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid) Deficiency and Excess Dheeraj Shah and H.P.S. Sachdev Vitamin C is important for synthesis of collagen at the level of hydroxyl- ation of lysine and proline in precollagen. It is also involved in neurotrans- mitter metabolism (conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine and tryptophan to serotonin), cholesterol metabolism (conversion of choles- terol to steroid hormones and bile acids), and the biosynthesis of carnitine. Vitamin C functions to maintain the iron and copper atoms, cofactors of the metalloenzymes, in a reduced (active) state. Vitamin C is an important antioxidant (electron donor) in the aqueous milieu of the body. Vitamin C enhances nonheme iron absorption, the transfer of iron from transferrin to ferritin, and the formation of tetrahydrofolic acid and thus can affect the cellular and immunologic functions of the hematopoietic system. Though vitamin C has antiinflammatory and immunomodulating effects, there is no evidence of clinical benefit of vitamin C supplementation in pediatric critical illnesses and respiratory tract infections, including COVID-19. DIETARY NEEDS AND SOURCES OF VITAMIN C Humans depend on dietary sources for vitamin C. An adequate intake is 40 mg for ages 0-6 months and 50 mg for 6-12 months. For older children, the recommended dietary allowance is 15 mg for ages 1-3 years, 25 mg for 4-8 years, 45 mg for 9-13 years, and 65-75 mg for 14-18 years. The recommended dietary allowances during preg- nancy and lactation are 85 mg/day and 120 mg/day, respectively. The requirement for vitamin C is increased during infectious and diarrheal diseases. Children exposed to smoking or environmental tobacco smoke also require increased amounts of foods rich in vita- min C. The best food sources of vitamin C are citrus fruits and fruit juices, peppers, berries, melons, guava, kiwifruit, tomatoes, cauli- flower, and green leafy vegetables. Vitamin C is easily destroyed by prolonged storage, overcooking, and processing of foods. Absorption of vitamin C occurs in the upper small intestine by an active process or by simple diffusion when large amounts are ingested. Vitamin C is not stored in the body but is taken up by all tissues; the highest levels are found in the pituitary and adrenal glands. The brain ascorbate con- tent in the fetus and neonate is markedly higher than the content in the adult brain, a finding probably related to its function in neurotransmitter synthesis. When a mother's intake of vitamin C during pregnancy and lactation is adequate, the newborn will have adequate tissue lev- els of vitamin C related to active placental transfer, subsequently maintained by the vitamin C in breast milk or commercial infant formulas. Breast milk contains sufficient vitamin C to prevent deficiency throughout infancy. Infants consuming pasteurized or boiled animal milk are at significant risk of developing deficiency if the other sources of vitamin C are also lacking in the diet. Neo- nates whose feeding has been delayed because of a clinical condi- tion can also have ascorbic acid deficiency. For patients receiving total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 80 mg/day is recommended for full-term infants and 25 mg/kg/day for preterm infants. Parents and children who choose a limited (selective) diet or those on fad diets are at risk for vitamin C deficiency. VITAMIN C DEFICIENCY receiving fruits and fruit juices are at significant risk for symptomatic disease. In the last decade, most cases of scurvy from North Amer- ica and Europe have been reported in children with developmental and behavioral disorders, especially autism spectrum disorders, on highly restrictive diets. Such dietary patterns occur mainly due to severe self-imposed dietary restrictions due to child preference or parental belief in unsubstantiated claims of benefit of such restric- tions in autism and other developmental disorders. In scurvy, there is defective formation of connective tissues and collagen in skin, cartilage, dentine, bone, and blood vessels, leading to their fragility. In the long bones, osteoid is not deposited by osteoblasts, the cortex is thin, and the trabeculae become brittle and fracture easily. Clinical Features The early manifestations of vitamin C deficiency are irritability, loss of appetite, low-grade fever, musculoskeletal pain, and tenderness in the legs. These signs and symptoms are followed by leg swelling. marked at the knees and the ankles-and pseudoparalysis. The infant might lie with the hips and knees semiflexed and the feet rotated out- ward. Subperiosteal hemorrhages in the lower-limb bones sometimes acutely increase the swelling and pain, and the condition might mimic acute osteomyelitis or arthritis. A "rosary" at the costochondral junc- tions and depression of the sternum are other typical features (Fig. 68.1). The angulation of scorbutic beads is usually sharper than that of a rachitic rosary. Gum changes are seen in older children after teeth have erupted, manifested as bluish purple, spongy swellings of the mucous membrane, especially over the upper incisors (Fig. 68.2). Anemia, a common finding in infants and young children with scurvy, is related to impaired iron absorption and coexistent hematopoietic nutrient deficiencies, including iron, vitamin Biz, and folate. Hemorrhagic manifestations of scurvy include petechiae, purpura, and ecchymo- ses at pressure points; epistaxis; gum bleeding; and the characteristic perifollicular hemorrhages (Fig. 68.3). Other manifestations are poor wound and fracture healing, hyperkeratosis of hair follicles, arthralgia, and muscle weakness. Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis The diagnosis of vitamin C deficiency is usually based on the char- acteristic clinical picture, the radiographic appearance of the long bones, and a history of poor vitamin C intake. A high index of suspicion is required in children on restrictive diets, particularly those with autism and other developmental disorders, and they should be evaluated for scurvy whenever they present with diffi- culty in walking or bone pains. The typical radiographic changes occur at the distal ends of the long bones and are particularly com- mon at the knees. The shafts of the long bones have a ground-glass appearance because of trabecular atrophy. The cortex is thin and dense, giving the appearance of pencil outlining of the diaphysis and epiphysis. The white line of Fränkel, an irregular but thickened white line at the metaphysis, represents the zone of well-calcified cartilage. The epiphyseal centers of ossification also have a ground- glass appearance and are surrounded by a sclerotic ring (Fig. 68.4). The more specific but late radiologic feature of scurvy is a zone of rarefaction under the white line at the metaphysis. This zone of rarefaction (Trümmerfeld zone), a linear break in the bone that is proximal and parallel to the white line, represents an area of debris of broken-down bone trabeculae and connective tissue. A Pelkan spur is a lateral prolongation of the white line and may be present at the cortical ends. Epiphyseal separation can occur along the line of destruction, with either linear displacement or compression of the epiphysis against the shaft (Fig. 68.5). Subperiosteal hemorrhages are not visible using plain radiographs during the active phase of scurvy. However, during healing, the elevated periosteum becomes calcified and radiopaque (see Fig. 68.5), sometimes giving a dumb- bell or club shape to the affected bone. MRI can demonstrate both acute and healing subperiosteal hematomas along with periostitis, metaphyseal changes (Fig. 68.4), and heterogeneous bone marrow signal intensity, even in the absence of changes in plain radiographs. Gelatinous transformation of bone marrow on aspiration has been reported in children with suspected malignancy. 

Chapter 68 • Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid) Deficiency and Excess 469 Fig. 68.1 Sharp angulation of beading at costochondral junction (scorbutic rosary) in scurvy. (Courtesy Dr. J.D. MacLean, McGill Centre for Tropical Diseases, Montreal.) Fig. 68.2 Clinical photograph showing inflamed marginal gingiva in scurvy. (From Agarwal A, Shaharyar A, Kumar A, Bhat MS, Mishra M. Scurvy in pediatric age group: a disease often forgotten? J Clin Orthop Trauma. 2015;6:101-107, Fig. 1, p. 103.) Biochemical tests are not very useful in the diagnosis of scurvy, because they do not reflect the tissue status. A plasma ascorbate concentration of <0.2 mg/dL usually is considered deficient. Leu- kocyte concentration of vitamin C is a better indicator of body stores, but this measurement is technically more difficult to per- form. Leukocyte concentrations of ≤10 ug/10% white blood cells are considered deficient and indicate latent scurvy, even in the absence of clinical signs of deficiency. Saturation of the tissues with vitamin C can be estimated from the urinary excretion of the vitamin after a test dose of ascorbic acid. In healthy children, 80% of the test dose appears in the urine within 3-5 hours after parenteral administra- tion. Generalized nonspecific aminoaciduria is common in scurvy, whereas plasma amino acid levels remain normal. Differential Diagnosis Scurvy is often misdiagnosed as infectious or juvenile idiopathic arthritis, osteomyelitis, nonaccidental trauma (child abuse), malig- nancy, or acrodynia. The early irritability and bone pain are sometimes attributed to nonspecific pains or other nutritional deficiencies. Cop- per deficiency results in a radiographic picture similar to that of scurvy. Henoch-Schönlein purpura, (IgA vasculitis) thrombocytopenic pur- pura, or leukemia is sometimes suspected in children presenting with hemorrhagic manifestations. Treatment Vitamin C supplements of 100-200 mg/day orally or parenterally ensure rapid and complete cure. The clinical improvement is seen within 1 week in most cases, but the treatment should be continued for up to 3 months for complete recovery. Fig. 68.3 Scurvy. A, Perifollicular hemorrhages. B, Corkscrew hairs with perifollicular hyperkeratotic papules. (Modified from Lipner S. A classic case of scurvy. Lancet. 2018;392[10145]:431.) A B Fig. 68.4 A, Radiograph of the knee in scurvy demonstrates a radi- odense band at the chondroosseous junction (Fränkel line; long arrows) and a translucent band in the metaphysis (Trümmerfeld zone; short ar- rows) of the distal femora and the proximal tibiae. B, Magnetic reso- nance imaging (coronal fat saturation T2-weighted imaging) of the knee demonstrates ill-defined T2 hyperintensities in the metaphyses and jux- taosseous soft tissue. The diaphysis was spared. (From Seya M, Handa A, Hasegawa D, et al. Scurvy: from a selective diet in children with developmental delay. J Pediatr. 2016;177:331, Fig. A and B, p. 331.) 

470 Part V • Nutrition R Chapter 69 Vitamin D Deficiency (Rickets) and Excess Larry A. Greenbaum + CAL - SH LD - CE Fig. 68.5 Large subperiosteal hematoma (SH) with areas of calcifica- tion (CAL) is seen along the shaft of the right femur of a child with ad- vanced scurvy. Epiphyseal separation is seen in both knees, with linear displacement (LD) in the left knee and compression (CE) against the shaft in the right knee. Breastfeeding protects against vitamin C deficiency throughout infancy. In children consuming milk formula, fortification with vitamin C must be ensured. Children consuming heat-treated milk or plant-based beverages (e.g., almond milk, soy milk) should consume adequate vitamin C-rich foods in infancy. Dietary or medicinal supplements are required in children on restrictive diets deficient in vitamin C, severely malnourished children, and those with chronic debilitating conditions (e.g., malignancies, neurologic disorders). Providing antenatal supplements of vitamin C to smok- ing mothers may mitigate some of the harmful effects of smoking on fetal and infant lung development and function. VITAMIN C TOXICITY Daily intake of <2 g of vitamin C is generally without adverse effects in adults. Larger doses can cause gastrointestinal problems, such as abdominal pain and osmotic diarrhea. Hemolysis has rarely been reported after high doses of ascorbic acid. Megadoses of vitamin C should be avoided in patients with a history of urolithiasis or condi- tions related to excessive iron accumulation, such as thalassemia and hemochromatosis. Data are sparse regarding vitamin C toxicity in children. The following values for tolerable upper intake levels are extrapolated from data for adults based on body weight differ- ences: ages 1-3 years, 400 mg; 4-8 years, 650 mg; 9-13 years, 1,200 mg; and 14-18 years, 1,800 mg. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. RICKETS Bone consists of a protein matrix called osteoid and a mineral phase, principally composed of calcium and phosphate, mostly in the form of hydroxyapatite. Osteomalacia occurs with inadequate mineral- ization of bone osteoid in children and adults. Rickets is a disease of growing bone caused by unmineralized matrix at the growth plates in children only before fusion of the epiphyses. Because growth plate cartilage and osteoid continue to expand but mineralization is inadequate, the growth plate thickens. Circumference of the growth plate and metaphysis is also greater, increasing bone width at the growth plates and causing classic clinical manifestations, such as widening of the wrists and ankles. The general softening of the bones causes them to bend easily when subject to forces such as weight bearing or muscle pull. This softening leads to a variety of Rickets is principally caused by vitamin D deficiency. Although largely corrected through public health measures that provided chil- dren with adequate vitamin D, rickets remains a persistent problem in developed countries, especially in children with restrictive diets (autism) or elimination diets (fear of allergies). It remains a significant problem in developing countries and may be secondary to nutritional vitamin D deficiency and inadequate intake of calcium (Table 69.1). Etiology There are many causes of rickets, including vitamin D disorders, cal- cium deficiency, phosphorus deficiency, and distal renal tubular aci- dosis (Table 69.2). Most manifestations of rickets are a result of skeletal changes (Table 69.3). Craniotabes is a softening of the cranial bones and can be detected by applying pressure at the occiput or over the parietal bones. The sensation is similar to the feel of pressing into a Ping-Pong ball and then releasing. Craniotabes may also be secondary to osteogenesis imperfecta, hydrocephalus, and syphilis. It is a normal finding in many newborns, especially near the suture lines, but typically disappears within a few months of birth. Widening of the costochondral junctions results in a rachitic "rosary," which feels like the beads of a rosary as the examiner's fingers move along the costochondral junctions from rib to rib (Fig. 69.1). Growth plate widening is also responsible for the enlargement at the wrists and ankles (Fig. 69.2). The horizontal depres- sion along the lower anterior chest known as the Harrison groove occurs from pulling of the softened ribs by the diaphragm during inspi- ration. Softening of the ribs also impairs air movement and predisposes patients to atelectasis and pneumonia. Valgus or varus deformities of the legs are common; windswept deformity occurs when one leg is in extreme valgus and the other is in extreme varus (Fig. 69.3). The clinical presentation of rickets may vary based on the etiology. Changes in the lower extremities tend to be the dominant feature in X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. Symptoms secondary to hypocalce- mia occur only in those forms of rickets associated with decreased serum 

Table 69.1 Physical and Metabolic Properties and Food Sources of Vitamins D, E, and K NAMES AND SYNONYMS CHARACTERISTICS BIOCHEMICAL EFFECTS OF ACTION DEFICIENCY VITAMIN D Vitamin D3 (3-cholecalciferol), which is synthesized in the skin, and vitamin D2 (from plants or yeast) are biologically equivalent; 1 mg = 40IU vitamin D Fat-soluble, stable to heat, acid, alkali, and oxidation; bile necessary for absorption; hydroxylation in the liver and kidney necessary for biologic activity Necessary for Gl absorption of calcium; also increases absorption of phosphate; direct actions on bone, including mediating resorption Rickets in growing children; osteomalacia; hypocalcemia can cause tetany and seizures EFFECTS OF EXCESS SOURCES Hypercalcemia, which can cause emesis, anorexia, pancreatitis, hypertension, arrhythmias, CNS effects, polyuria, nephrolithiasis, renal failure Exposure to sunlight (UV light); fish oils, fatty fish, egg yolks, and vitamin D-fortified formula, milk, cereals, bread VITAMIN E Group of related compounds with similar biologic activities; a-tocopherol is the most potent and most common form Fat-soluble; readily oxidized by oxygen, iron, rancid fats; bile acids necessary for absorption Antioxidant; protection of cell membranes from linid pormatidaton free radicals Red cell hemolysis in Unknown premature infants; posterior column and cerebellar dysfunction; pigmentary Vegetable oils, seeds, nuts, green leafy vegetables, margarine VITAMIN K Group of naphthoquinones with similar biologic activities; Ky (phylloquinone) from diet; K2 (menaquinones) from intestinal bacteria Natural compounds are fat-soluble; stable to heat and reducing agents; labile to oxidizing agent, strong acids, alkali, light; bile salts necessary for intestinal absorption CNS, Central nervous system; Gl, gastrointestinal; UV, ultraviolet. Vitamin K-dependent proteins include coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X; proteins C, S, Z; matrix Gla protein, osteocalcin Hemorrhagic Not established; manifestations; analogs (no longer long-term bone used) caused and vascular health hemolytic anemia, jaundice, kernicterus, death Green leafy vegetables, liver, certain legumes and plant oils; widely distributed Table 69.2 Causes of Rickets VITAMIN D DISORDERS Nutritional vitamin D deficiency Congenital vitamin D deficiency Secondary vitamin D deficiency Malabsorption Increased degradation Decreased liver 25-hydroxylase Vitamin D-dependent rickets types 1A and 1B Vitamin D-dependent rickets types 2A and 2B Chronic kidney disease CALCIUM DEFICIENCY Low intake Diet Premature infants (rickets of prematurity) Malabsorption Primary disease Dietary inhibitors of calcium absorption PHOSPHORUS DEFICIENCY Inadequate intake Premature infants (rickets of prematurity) Aluminum-containing antacids RENAL LOSSES X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets* Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets* Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets types 1, 2, and 3* Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria Hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis types 1 and 2 Overproduction of fibroblast growth factor-23 Tumor-induced rickets* McCune-Albright syndrome* Epidermal nevus syndrome (cutaneous skeletal hypophosphatemia syndrome)* Neurofibromatosis* Fanconi syndrome Dent disease Distal renal tubular acidosis *Disorders secondary to excess fibroblast growth factor-23. Table 69.3 Clinical Features of Rickets GENERAL Failure to thrive (malnutrition) Listlessness Protruding abdomen Muscle weakness (especially proximal) Hypocalcemic dilated cardiomyopathy Fractures (pathologic, minimal trauma) Increased intracranial pressure HEAD Craniotabes Frontal bossing Delayed fontanel closure (usually closed by 2 yr) Delayed dentition No incisors by age 10 mo No molars by age 18 mo Caries Craniosynostosis CHEST Rachitic rosary Harrison groove Respiratory infections and atelectasis* BACK Scoliosis Kyphosis Lordosis EXTREMITIES Enlargement of wrists and ankles Valgus or varus deformities Windswept deformity (valgus deformity of one leg with varus deformity of other leg) Anterior bowing of tibia and femur Coxa varal Leg pain HYPOCALCEMIC SYMPTOMST Tetany Seizures Stridor caused by laryngeal spasm *These features are most frequently associated with the vitamin D deficiency disorders. *These symptoms develop only in children with disorders that produce hypocalcemia (see Table 69.4). 

472 Part V • Nutrition Fig. 69.1 Rachitic "rosary" in a child with rickets. (Courtesy Dr. Thom- as D. Thacher, Rochester, MN.) Fig. 69.2 Hands and forearms of a young child with rickets show prominence above the wrist, resulting from flaring and poor mineraliza- tion of lower end of the radius and ulna. (From Bullough PG. Orthopae- dic Pathology, 5th ed. St Louis: Mosby: 2010: Fig 8-31.) The chief complaint in a child with rickets is quite variable. Many children present because of skeletal deformities, whereas others have difficulty walking owing to a combination of deformity and weakness. Other common presenting complaints include failure to thrive (malnutrition) and symptomatic hypocalcemia (see Chapters 610-612). Rachitic changes are most easily visualized on posteroanterior radio- graphs of the wrist, although characteristic rachitic changes can be seen at other growth plates (Figs. 69.4 and 69.5). Decreased calcifica- tion leads to thickening of the growth plate. The edge of the metaphysis loses its sharp border, which is described as fraying. The edge of the metaphysis changes from a convex or flat surface to a more concave surface. This change to a concave surface is termed cupping and is most easily seen at the distal ends of the radius, ulna, and fibula. There is widening of the distal end of the metaphysis, corresponding to the clin- ical observation of thickened wrists and ankles, as well as the rachitic rosary. Other radiologic features include coarse trabeculation of the diaphysis and generalized rarefaction. Diagnosis The diagnosis of rickets is based on the presence of classic radio- graphic abnormalities. It is supported by physical examination find- ings, history, and laboratory results consistent with a specific etiology (Table 69.4). Clinical Evaluation Because the majority of children with rickets have a nutritional defi- ciency, the initial evaluation should focus on a dietary history, Fig. 69.3 Windswept deformity of the legs in an older child with rick- ets. (From Rickets and osteomalacia. In Hochberg MC, Silman AJ, Smo- len JS, et al., eds. Rheumatology, 4th ed. London: Mosby; 2008: Fig emphasizing intake of both vitamin D and calcium. Most children in industrialized nations receive vitamin D from formula, fortified milk, or vitamin supplements. Along with the amount, the exact composi- tion of the formula or milk is pertinent, because rickets has occurred in children given products that are called "milk" (e.g., soy milk) but are deficient in vitamin D and minerals. Cutaneous synthesis mediated by sunlight exposure is an important source of vitamin D. It is important to ask about time spent outside, sunscreen use, and clothing, especially if there may be a cultural reason for increased covering of the skin. Because winter sunlight is ineffective at stimulating cutaneous synthesis of vitamin D, the season is an addi- tional consideration. Children with increased skin pigmentation are at increased risk for vitamin D deficiency because of decreased cutaneous The presence of maternal risk factors for nutritional vitamin D deficiency, including diet and sun exposure, is an important consider- ation when a neonate or young infant has rachitic findings, especially if the infant is breastfed (Table 69.5). Determining a child's intake of dairy products, the main dietary source of calcium, provides a general sense of calcium intake. High dietary fiber can interfere with calcium The child's medication use is relevant, because certain medica- tions, such as the anticonvulsants phenobarbital and phenytoin, increase degradation of vitamin D, and phosphate binders or aluminum-containing antacids interfere with the absorption of phosphate. Malabsorption of vitamin D is suggested by a history of liver or intestinal disease. Undiagnosed liver or intestinal disease should be suspected if the child has gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, although occasionally rickets is the presenting complaint. Fat malabsorption is often associated with diarrhea or oily stools, and there may be signs or symptoms suggesting deficiencies of other fat-soluble vitamins (A, E, and K; see Chapters 66, 70, and 71). 

Chapter 69 • Vitamin D Deficiency (Rickets) and Excess 473 A history of renal disease (proteinuria, hematuria, urinary tract infections) is an additional significant consideration, given the impor- tance of chronic kidney disease as a cause of rickets. Polyuria can occur in children with chronic kidney disease or Fanconi syndrome. Children with rickets might have a history of dental caries, poor growth, delayed walking, waddling gait, pneumonia, and hypocalce- mic symptoms. The family history is critical, given the large number of genetic causes of rickets, although most of these causes are rare. Along with bone disease, it is important to inquire about leg deformities, A B Fig. 69.4 Radiographs of the wrist in normal child (A) and child with rickets (B), who has metaphyseal fraying and cupping of the distal ra- dius and ulna. A B Fig. 69.5 Radiographs of the knees in 7-year-old female with distal re- nal tubular acidosis and rickets. A, At initial presentation, there is widen- ing of the growth plate and metaphyseal fraying. B, Dramatic improve- ment after 4 months of therapy with alkali. Table 69.4 Laboratory Findings in Various Disorders Causing Rickets DISORDER Ca Pi PTH 25-(OH)D Vitamin D deficiency N, 1 VDDR, type 1A N, 1 1 N VDDR, type 1B N, 1 VDDR, type 2A N, 1 1 VDDR, type 2B N, 4 Chronic kidney disease N, 4 Dietary Pi deficiency N XLH* ADHR* N N HHRHI ARHR, type 1 or type 2* N N Tumor-induced rickets* Fanconi syndrome Dent's disease Dietary Ca deficiency N N N N, 4 N, 1 N, T N N, 1 N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N URINE Pi ALP 1,25-(OH)D I, N, T N TT TT RD RD RD RD RD or t N 1/ 1/ 1/ URINE Ca 1 1 1 1 N, 1 1 1 1 1 or t 1 *Elevated fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF-23). +FGF-23 elevated in some patients. ADHR, Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ARHR, autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets; Ca, calcium; HHRH, hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria; N, normal; Pi, inorganic phosphorus; PTH, parathyroid hormone; RD, relatively decreased (because it should be increased given the concurrent hypophosphatemia); VDDR, vitamin D-dependent rickets; XLH, X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets; 1,25-(OH),D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D; 25-OHD, 25-hydroxyvitamin D; 1, decreased; T, increased; 11, extremely increased. 

474 Part V • Nutrition Table 69.5 Risk Factors for Nutritional Rickets and Osteomalacia and Their Prevention MATERNAL FACTORS Vitamin D deficiency Dark skin pigmentation High latitude during winter/spring season Other causes of restricted sun (UVB) exposure (e.g., predominant indoor living, disability, pollution, cloud cover) Poverty, malnutrition, special diets INFANT/CHILDHOOD FACTORS Neonatal vitamin D deficiency secondary to maternal deficiency/ vitamin D deficiency Lack of infant supplementation with vitamin D Prolonged breastfeeding without appropriate complementary feeding from 6 mo Dark skin pigmentati winter/oring trice sun (UB) exposure (e 9., predominant indoor living, disability, pollution, cloud cover) Avoidant restrictive food intake disorder Low-vitamin D diet Low-calcium diet Poverty, malnutrition, special diets PREVENTIVE MEASURES Sun exposure (UVB content of sunlight depends on latitude and season Vitamin D supplementation Strategic fortification of the habitual food supply Normal calcium intake Adapted from Munns CF, Shaw N, Kiely M, et al. Global consensus recommendations on prevention and management of nutritional rickets. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016;101:394-415, p. 401. difficulties with walking, or unexplained short stature, because some parents may be unaware of their diagnosis. Undiagnosed dis- ease in the mother is not unusual in X-linked hypophosphatemia. A history of an unexplained sibling death during infancy may be pres- ent in the child with cystinosis, the most common cause of Fanconi syndrome in children. The physical examination focuses on detecting manifestations of rickets (see Table 69.3). It is important to observe the child's gait, auscultate the lungs to detect atelectasis or pneumonia, and plot the patient's growth. Alopecia suggests vitamin D-dependent rick- ets type 2. The initial laboratory tests in a child with rickets should include serum calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), parathy- roid hormone (PTH), 25- hydroxyvitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25-D), creatinine, and electrolytes (see Table 69.4 for interpre- tation). Urinalysis is useful for detecting the glycosuria seen with Fanconi syndrome. Evaluation of urinary excretion of calcium (24- hour collection for calcium or calcium:creatinine ratio) is helpful if hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria or Dent disease is suspected. Direct measurement of other fat-soluble vita- mins (A, E, and K) or indirect assessment of deficiency (prothrom- bin time for vitamin K deficiency) is appropriate if malabsorption is a consideration. VITAMIN D DISORDERS Vitamin D Physiology Vitamin D can be synthesized in skin epithelial cells and therefore technically is not a vitamin. Cutaneous synthesis is normally the most important source of vitamin D and depends on the conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol to vitamin D3 (3-cholecalciferol) by ultravio- let B (UVB) radiation from the sun. The efficiency of this process is decreased by melanin; therefore more sun exposure is necessary for vitamin D synthesis in people with increased skin pigmentation. Mea- sures to decrease sun exposure, such as covering the skin with cloth- ing or applying sunscreen, also decrease vitamin D synthesis. Children who spend less time outside have reduced vitamin D synthesis. The winter sun away from the equator is ineffective at stimulating vitamin D synthesis. There are few natural dietary sources of vitamin D. Fish liver oils have a high vitamin D content. Other good dietary sources include fatty fish and egg yolks. Most children in industrialized countries receive vitamin D via fortified foods, especially formula and milk (both of which contain 400 IU/L) and some breakfast cereals and breads. Supplemental vitamin D may be vitamin D2 (which comes from plants or yeast) or vitamin D3. Breast milk has a low vitamin D content, approximately 12-60 IU/L. Vitamin D is transported bound to vitamin D-binding pro- tein to the liver, where 25-hydroxlase converts vitamin D into 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-D), the most abundant circulating form of vitamin D. Because there is little regulation of this liver hydrox- ylation step, measurement of 25-D is the standard method for determining a patient's vitamin D status. The final step in activa- tion occurs in the kidney, where the enzyme la-hydroxylase adds a second hydroxyl group, resulting in 1,25-D. The la-hydroxylase is upregulated by PTH and hypophosphatemia and inhibited by hyperphosphatemia and 1,25-D. Most 1,25-D circulates bound to vitamin D-binding protein. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D acts by binding to an intracellular receptor, and the complex affects gene expression by interact- ing with vitamin D response elements. In the intestine, this bind- ing results in a marked increase in calcium absorption, which is highly dependent on 1,25-D. There is also an increase in phos- phorus absorption, but this effect is less significant because most dietary phosphorus absorption is vitamin D independent. 1,25-D also has direct effects on bone, including mediating resorption. 1,25-D directly suppresses PTH secretion by the parathyroid gland, thus completing a negative feedback loop. PTH secretion is also suppressed by the increase in serum calcium mediated by 1,25-D. 1,25-D inhibits its own synthesis in the kidney and increases the synthesis of inactive metabolites. Nutritional Vitamin D Deficiency Vitamin D deficiency remains the most common cause of rickets glob- ally and even occurs in industrialized countries. Because vitamin D can be obtained from dietary sources or from cutaneous synthesis, most patients in industrialized countries have a combination of risk factors that lead to vitamin D deficiency. Etiology Vitamin D deficiency most frequently occurs in infancy because of a combination of poor intake and inadequate cutaneous synthesis. Transplacental transport of vitamin D, mostly 25-D, typically pro- vides enough vitamin D for the first or second months of life unless there is severe maternal vitamin D deficiency. Infants who receive formula receive adequate vitamin D, even without cutaneous syn- thesis. Because of the low vitamin D content of breast milk, breast- fed infants rely on cutaneous synthesis or vitamin supplements. Cutaneous synthesis can be limited because of the ineffectiveness of the winter sun in stimulating vitamin D synthesis; avoidance of sunlight because of concerns about cancer, neighborhood safety, or cultural practices; and decreased cutaneous synthesis because of increased skin pigmentation. The effect of skin pigmentation explains why most cases of nutri- tional rickets in the United States and Northern Europe occur in breastfed children of African descent or other dark-pigmented populations. The additional impact of the winter sun is supported by such infants more often presenting in the late winter or spring. In some groups, complete covering of infants or the practice of not taking infants outside has a significant role, explaining the occur- rence of rickets in infants living in areas of abundant sunshine, such as the Middle East. Because the mothers of some infants can 

have the same risk factors, decreased maternal vitamin D can also contribute, both by leading to reduced vitamin D content in breast milk and by lessening transplacental delivery of vitamin D. Rickets caused by vitamin D deficiency can also be secondary to dietary practices, such as vegan diets that use unfortified soy milk or rice milk. Children with restrictive food habits (autism) or food elimination diets (fear of allergies) may be at risk for vitamin D Clinical Manifestations The clinical features are typical of rickets (see Table 69.3), with a significant minority presenting with symptoms of hypocalcemia. Prolonged laryngospasm is occasionally fatal. These children have an increased risk of pneumonia and muscle weakness leading to a delay in motor development. Laboratory Findings Table 69.4 summarizes the principal laboratory findings. Hypocalce- mia is a variable finding because the elevated PTH acts to increase the serum calcium concentration. The hypophosphatemia is caused by PTH-induced renal losses of phosphate, combined with a decrease in intestinal absorption. The wide variation in 1,25-D levels (low, normal, or high) is secondary to the upregulation of renal la-hydroxylase caused by concomitant hypophosphatemia and hyperparathyroidism. Because serum levels of 1,25-D are much lower than the levels of 25-D, even with low levels of 25-D, there is often enough 25-D still present to act as a precursor for 1,25-D synthesis in the presence of upregu- lated 1a-hydroxylase. The level of 1,25-D is only low when there is severe vitamin D deficiency. Some patients have a metabolic acidosis secondary to PTH- induced renal bicarbonate wasting. There may also be generalized aminoaciduria. Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis The diagnosis of nutritional vitamin D deficiency is based on the combination of a history of poor vitamin D intake and risk factors for decreased cutaneous synthesis, radiographic changes consistent with rickets, and typical laboratory findings (see Table 69.4). A normal PTH level almost never occurs with vitamin D deficiency and suggests a pri- mary phosphate disorder. Treatment Children with nutritional vitamin D deficiency should receive vita- min D and adequate nutritional intake of calcium and phospho- rus. There are two strategies for administration of vitamin D. With stoss therapy, vitamin D (300,000-600,000 IU) is administered orally (preferred) or intramuscularly as 2-4 doses over 1 day (vita- min D3 is preferred to D2 because of the longer half-life of D3). Because the doses are observed, stoss therapy is ideal in patients in whom adherence to therapy is questionable. The alternative strat- egy is daily vitamin D with a minimum dose of 2,000 IU/day for a minimum of 3 months. Either strategy should be followed by daily vitamin D intake of 400 IU/day if <1 year old or 600 IU/day if ›1 year old. It is important to ensure that children receive adequate dietary calcium (minimum of 500 mg/day) and phosphorus; this dietary intake is usually provided by milk, formula, and other dairy products, although calcium supplements may be needed in some patients. Children who have symptomatic hypocalcemia might need intra- venous (IV) calcium acutely, followed by oral calcium supplements, which typically can be tapered over 2-6 weeks in children who receive adequate dietary calcium. Transient use of IV or oral 1,25-D (calcitriol) is often helpful in reversing hypocalcemia in the acute phase by providing active vitamin D during the delay, as supple- mental vitamin D is converted to active vitamin D. Calcitriol doses are typically 0.05 ug/kg/day. IV calcium is initially given as an acute bolus for symptomatic hypocalcemia (20 mg/kg calcium chloride Chapter 69 • Vitamin D Deficiency (Rickets) and Excess 475 or 100 mg/kg calcium gluconate). Some patients require a continu- ous IV calcium drip, titrated to maintain the desired serum calcium level. These patients should transition to enteral calcium, and most infants require approximately 1,000 mg of elemental calcium. Prognosis Most children with nutritional vitamin D deficiency have an excel- lent response to treatment, with radiologic healing occurring within a few months. Laboratory test results should also normal- ize rapidly. Many of the bone malformations improve dramatically, but children with severe disease can have permanent deformities and short stature. Rarely, patients benefit from orthopedic interven- tion for leg deformities, although this is generally not done until the metabolic bone disease has healed, there is clear evidence that the deformity will not self-resolve, and the deformity is causing func- tional problems. Prevention Most cases of nutritional rickets can be prevented by universal admin- istration of 400 IU of vitamin D to infants <1 year old. Older children with risk factors for inadequate intake should receive 600 IU/day. Vita- min D may be administered as a component of a multivitamin or as a vitamin D supplement. Congenital Vitamin D Deficiency Congenital rickets is quite rare in industrialized countries and occurs when there is severe maternal vitamin D deficiency dur- ing pregnancy. Maternal risk factors include poor dietary intake of vitamin D, lack of adequate sun exposure, and closely spaced pregnancies. These newborns can have symptomatic hypocalcemia, intrauterine growth restriction, and decreased bone ossification, along with classic rachitic changes (craniotabes, large fontanelle, fractures). In addition, neonates with congenital rickets may have bone pain, weakness, elevated PTH and ALP levels, and hypocalce- mia with low serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels. Subtler maternal vitamin D deficiency can have an adverse effect on neonatal bone density and birthweight, cause a defect in dental enamel, and pre- dispose infants to neonatal hypocalcemic tetany. Treatment of con- genital rickets includes vitamin D supplementation and adequate intake of calcium and phosphorus. Use of prenatal vitamins con- taining vitamin D (600 1U) prevents this entity. Secondary Vitamin D Deficiency Etiology Along with inadequate intake, vitamin D deficiency can result from inadequate absorption, decreased hydroxylation in the liver, and increased degradation. Because vitamin D is fat soluble, its absorp- tion may be decreased in patients with a variety of liver and GI diseases, including cholestatic liver disease, defects in bile acid metabolism, cystic fibrosis and other causes of pancreatic dysfunc- tion, celiac disease, and Crohn disease. Malabsorption of vitamin D can also occur with intestinal lymphangiectasia and after intestinal resection. Severe liver disease, which usually is also associated with mal- absorption, can cause a decrease in 25-D formation as a result of insufficient enzyme activity. Because of the large reserve of 25-hydroxlase activity in the liver, vitamin D deficiency caused by liver disease usually requires a loss of >90% of liver function. A variety of medications increase the degradation of vitamin D by inducing the cytochrome P450 (CYP) system. Rickets from vita- min D deficiency can develop in children receiving anticonvulsants (e.g., phenobarbital, phenytoin) or antituberculosis medications (e.g., isoniazid, rifampin). Treatment of vitamin D deficiency attributable to malabsorption requires high doses of vitamin D. Because of its better absorption, 25-D (25-50 ug/day or 5-7 ug/kg/day) is superior to vitamin D3. The dose is adjusted based on monitoring of serum levels of 25-D. Alternatively, 

476 Part V • Nutrition patients may be treated with 1,25-D, which also is better absorbed in the presence of fat malabsorption, or with parenteral vitamin D. Chil- dren with rickets as a result of increased degradation of vitamin D by the CYP system require the same acute therapy as indicated for nutri- tional deficiency (discussed earlier), followed by long-term adminis- tration of high doses of vitamin D (e.g., 1,000 IU/day), with dosing titrated based on serum levels of 25-D. Some patients require as much as 4,000 IU/day. Vitamin D-Dependent Rickets, Type 1 Children with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 1A, an autoso- mal recessive disorder, have pathologic gene variants in CYP27B, which encodes the renal la-hydroxylase, preventing conversion of 25-D into 1,25-D. These patients normally present during the first 2 years of life and can have any of the classic features of rick- ets (see Table 69.3), including symptomatic hypocalcemia. They have normal levels of 25-D but low levels of 1,25-D (see Table 69.4). Occasionally, 1,25-D levels are at the lower limit of normal, inappropriately low given the high PTH and low serum phospho- rus levels, both of which should increase the activity of renal la- hydroxylase and cause elevated levels of 1,25-D. As in nutritional vitamin D deficiency, renal tubular dysfunction can cause a meta- bolic acidosis and generalized aminoaciduria. Vitamin D-dependent rickets type 1B is secondary to pathologic variants in the gene (CYPRI) for the principal 25-hydroxylase. Patients have low levels of 25-D but normal levels of 1,25-D (see Vitamin D-dependent rickets type 1A responds to long-term treat- ment with 1,25-D (calcitriol). Initial doses are 0.25-2 ug/day, and lower doses are used once the rickets has healed. Especially during initial therapy, it is important to ensure adequate intake of calcium. The dose of calcitriol is adjusted to maintain a low-normal serum calcium level, a normal serum phosphorus level, and a high-normal serum PTH level. Targeting a low-normal calcium concentration and a high-normal PTH level avoids excessive dosing of calcitriol, which can cause hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. Therefore patient monitor- ing includes periodic assessment of urinary calcium excretion, with a target of <4 mg/kg/day. Vitamin D-dependent rickets type 1B may respond to pharma- cologic doses of vitamin D2 (3,000 U/day) as a result of alternative enzymes with 25-hydroxylase activity or residual activity of the abnor- Vitamin D-Dependent Rickets, Type 2 Patients with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A have pathologic variants in VDR, the gene encoding the vitamin D receptor, pre- venting a normal physiologic response to 1,25-D. Levels of 1,25-D are extremely elevated in this autosomal recessive disorder (see Table 69.4). Most patients present during infancy, although rick- ets in less severely affected patients might not be diagnosed until adulthood. Less severe disease is associated with a partially func- tional vitamin D receptor. Approximately 50-70% of children have alopecia, which tends to be associated with a more severe form of the disease and can range from alopecia areata to alopecia totalis. Epidermal cysts are a less common manifestation. Vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2B appears to result from over- expression of a hormone response element-binding protein that inter- feres with the actions of 1,25-D. Alopecia may be present. Treatment Some patients respond to extremely high doses of vitamin D2 (25-D or 1,25-D), especially patients without alopecia. This response is caused by a partially functional vitamin D receptor in patients with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A, but may also occur in vitamin D-depen- dent rickets type 2B. All patients should be given a 3- to 6-month trial of high-dose vitamin D and oral calcium. The initial dose of 1,25-D should be 2 ug/day, but some patients require doses as high as 50-60 ug/day. Calcium doses are 1,000-3,000 mg/day. Patients who do not respond to high-dose vitamin D may be treated with long-term IV calcium, with possible transition to very high-dose oral calcium sup- plements. Treatment of patients who do not respond to vitamin D is difficult. Chronic Kidney Disease With chronic kidney disease, there is decreased activity of la- hydroxylase in the kidney, leading to diminished production of 1,25-D In chronic kidney disease, unlike the other causes of vitamin D defi- ciency, patients have hyperphosphatemia as a result of decreased renal excretion (see Table 69.4 and Chapter 572.2). Treatment Therapy requires the use of a form of vitamin D that can act without 1-hydroxylation by the kidney (calcitriol), which both permits ade- quate absorption of calcium and directly suppresses the parathyroid gland. Because hyperphosphatemia is a stimulus for PTH secretion, normalization of the serum phosphorus level through a combination of dietary phosphorus restriction and use of oral phosphate binders is as important as the use of activated vitamin D. CALCIUM DEFICIENCY Pathophysiology Rickets secondary to inadequate dietary calcium is a significant problem in some countries in Africa, although there are cases in other regions of the world, including industrialized Because breast milk and formula are excellent sources of calcium, this form of rickets develops after children have been weaned from breast milk or formula and is more likely to occur in children who are weaned early. Rickets develops because the diet has low calcium content, typically <200 mg/day if <12 months old or <300 mg/day if >12 months old. The child has minimal intake of dairy products or other sources of calcium. In addition, because of reliance on grains and green leafy vegetables, the diet may be high in phytate, oxalate, and phosphate, which decrease absorption of dietary calcium. In industrialized countries, rickets caused by calcium deficiency can occur in children who consume an unconventional diet. Examples include children with milk allergy who have low dietary calcium and children who transition from formula or breast milk to juice, soda, or a calcium-poor soy drink, without an alternative source of This type of rickets can develop in children who receive IV nutri- tion without adequate calcium. Malabsorption of calcium can occur in celiac disease, intestinal abetalipoproteinemia, and after small bowel resection. There may be concurrent malabsorption of vitamin D. Clinical Manifestations Children with calcium deficiency have the classic signs and symp- toms of rickets (see Table 69.3). Presentation can occur during infancy or early childhood, although some cases are diagnosed in teenagers. Because calcium deficiency occurs after the cessation of breastfeed- ing, it tends to occur later than the nutritional vitamin D deficiency that is associated with breastfeeding. In Nigeria, nutritional vitamin D deficiency is most common at 4-15 months of age, whereas calcium deficiency rickets typically occurs at 15-25 months. Diagnosis Laboratory findings include increased levels of ALP, PTH, and 1,25-D (see Table 69.4). Calcium levels may be normal or low, although symp- tomatic hypocalcemia is uncommon. There is decreased urinary excre- tion of calcium, and serum phosphorus levels may be low as a result of renal wasting of phosphate from secondary hyperparathyroidism. In some children, there is coexisting nutritional vitamin D deficiency, with low 25-D levels. Treatment Treatment focuses on providing adequate calcium, typically as a dietary supplement (doses of 700 [age 1-3 years], 1,000 [4-8 years], 

and 1,300 [9-18 years mg/day of elemental calcium are effective). Vitamin D supplementation is necessary if there is concurrent vita- min D deficiency (discussed earlier). Prevention strategies include discouraging early cessation of breastfeeding and increasing dietary sources of calcium. In countries such as Kenya, where many chil- dren have diets high in cereal with negligible intake of cow's milk, school-based milk programs have been effective in reducing the prevalence of rickets. PHOSPHORUS DEFICIENCY Inadequate Intake With the exception of starvation or severe anorexia, it is almost impossible to have a diet that is deficient in phosphorus, because phosphorus is present in most foods. Decreased phosphorus absorption can occur in diseases associated with malabsorption (celiac disease, cystic fibrosis, cholestatic liver disease), but if rick- ets develops, the primary problem is usually malabsorption of vita- min D and/or calcium. Isolated malabsorption of phosphorus occurs in patients with long-term use of aluminum-containing antacids. These com- pounds are very effective at chelating phosphate in the GI tract, leading to decreased absorption. This decreased absorption results in hypophosphatemia with secondary osteomalacia in adults and rickets in children. This entity responds to discontinuation of the antacid and short-term phosphorus supplementation. Fibroblast Growth Factor-23 Fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF-23) is a humoral mediator that decreases renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate and therefore decreases serum phosphorus. FGF-23, synthesized by osteocytes, also decreases the activity of renal la-hydroxylase, resulting in a decrease in the production of 1,25-D. Increased levels of FGF-23 cause many of the renal phosphate-wasting diseases (see Table 69.2). X-Linked Hypophosphatemic Rickets Among the genetic disorders causing rickets because of hypophos- phatemia, X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (XLH) is the most common, with a prevalence of 1/20,000. The defective gene is on the X chromosome, but female carriers are affected, so it is an X-linked- dominant disorder. Pathophysiology The pathologic variants are in a gene called PHEX because it is a phosphate-regulating gene with homology to endopeptidases on the X chromosome. The product of this gene appears to have an indirect role in inactivating FGF-23. Thus pathologic variants in PHEX lead to increased levels of FGF-23. Because the actions of FGF-23 include inhi- bition of phosphate reabsorption in the proximal tubule, phosphate excretion is increased. FGF-23 also inhibits renal la-hydroxylase, lead- ing to decreased production of 1,25-D. Clinical Manifestations These patients have rickets, but abnormalities of the lower extremities and poor growth are the dominant features. Delayed dentition and tooth abscesses are also common. Some patients have hypophosphate- mia and short stature without clinically evident bone disease. Laboratory Findings Patients have high renal excretion of phosphate, hypophosphate- mia, and increased ALP; PTH and serum calcium levels are normal (see Table 69.4). Hypophosphatemia normally upregulates renal la- hydroxylase and should lead to an increase in 1,25-D, but these patients have low or inappropriately normal levels of 1,25-D. Treatment Burosumab is a monoclonal antibody to FGF-23 that is approved for treating XLH in children >1 year, although cost may limit its availabil- ity in low-resourced countries. Outcomes are better and side effects decreased when compared with conventional therapy. The dose of Chapter 69 • Vitamin D Deficiency (Rickets) and Excess 477 burosumab is titrated to normalize the serum phosphorus; it is contra- indicated in patients with severe renal impairment. Conventional treatment is a combination of oral phosphorus and 1,25-D (calcitriol). The daily need for phosphorus supplementation is 1-3 g of elemental phosphorus divided into four or five doses. Frequent dosing helps to prevent prolonged decrements in serum phosphorus because there is a rapid decline after each dose. In addi- tion, frequent dosing decreases diarrhea, a complication of high- dose oral phosphorus. Calcitriol is administered at 30-70 ng/kg/day Complications of conventional treatment occur when there is not an adequate balance between phosphorus supplementation and cal- citriol. Excess phosphorus, by decreasing enteral calcium absorption, leads to secondary hyperparathyroidism, with worsening of the bone lesions. In contrast, excess calcitriol causes hypercalciuria and neph- rocalcinosis and can even cause hypercalcemia. Therefore laboratory monitoring of treatment includes serum calcium, phosphorus, ALP, PTH, and urinary calcium, as well as periodic renal ultrasound to evaluate patients for nephrocalcinosis. Because of variation in the serum phosphorus level and the importance of avoiding excessive phosphorus dosing, normalization of ALP levels is a more useful method of assessing the therapeutic response than measuring serum phosphorus. For children with significant short stature, growth hor- mone is an effective option. Children with severe deformities might need osteotomies, but these procedures should be done only when treatment has led to resolution of the bone disease. Prognosis The response to therapy is usually good, although frequent dosing can lead to problems with compliance with conventional therapy. Girls generally have less severe disease than boys, probably because of the X-linked inheritance. Short stature can persist despite healing of the rickets. Adults generally do well with less aggressive treatment, and options include burosumab, conventional treatment, and no treatment. Adults with bone pain, poorly healing fractures, or other symptoms improve with treatment. Autosomal Dominant Hypophosphatemic Rickets Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR) is much less common than XLH. There is incomplete penetrance and vari- able age of onset. Patients with ADHR have a pathologic variant in the gene encoding FGF-23 (FGF23). The pathologic variant prevents degradation of FGF-23 by proteases, leading its level to increase. The actions of FGF-23 include decreased reabsorption of phosphate in the renal proximal tubule, which results in hypophos- phatemia, and inhibition of la-hydroxylase in the kidney, causing a decrease in 1,25-D synthesis. In ADHR, as in XLH, abnormal laboratory findings are hypophospha- temia, elevated ALP level, and a low or inappropriately normal 1,25-D level (see Table 69.4). Treatment is similar to the conventional approach with phosphate supplementation and calcitriol used in XLH. However, iron deficiency, which upregulates FGF-23 synthesis, should be corrected if present. Autosomal Recessive Hypophosphatemic Rickets Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets (ARHR) type 1 is an extremely rare disorder caused by pathologic variants in the DMP1 gene. ARHR type 2 occurs in patients with pathologic variants in ENPP1. Pathologic variants in ENPP1 also cause generalized arterial calcification of infancy. Raine syndrome, also called ARHR type 3, is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathologic variants in FAM20C and is an osteosclerotic bone dysplasia that is often fatal in the neonatal period. However, patients who survive into childhood may develop rickets. The three types of ARHR are associated with elevated levels of FGF- 23, leading to renal phosphate wasting, hypophosphatemia, and low or inappropriately normal levels of 1,25-D. Treatment is similar to the approach used in XLH, although monitoring for arterial calcification is prudent in patients with ENPP1 pathologic variants. 

478 Part V • Nutrition Hereditary Hypophosphatemic Rickets with Hypercalciuria Hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH) is a rare disorder that is mainly found in the Middle East. Pathophysiology This autosomal recessive disorder is caused by pathologic variants in the gene for a sodium-phosphate co-transporter in the proximal tubule (SLC34A3). The renal phosphate leak causes hypophospha- temia, which then stimulates production of 1,25-D. The high level of 1,25-D increases intestinal absorption of calcium, suppressing PTH. Hypercalciuria ensues as a result of the high absorption of calcium and the low level of PTH, which normally decreases renal excretion of calcium. Clinical Manifestations lower extremities. The severity of the disease varies, and some fam- ily members have no evidence of rickets but have kidney stones sec- ondary to hypercalciuria. Laboratory Findings Laboratory findings include hypophosphatemia, renal phosphate wast- ing, elevated serum ALP levels, and elevated 1,25-D levels. PTH levels are low (see Table 69.4). Treatment Therapy for HHRH patients relies on oral phosphorus replacement (1-2.5 g/day of elemental phosphorus in five divided doses). Treat- ment of the hypophosphatemia decreases serum levels of 1,25-D and corrects the hypercalciuria. The response to therapy is usually excellent, with resolution of pain, weakness, and radiographic evi- dence of rickets. Hypophosphatemic Rickets with Nephrolithiasis and Osteoporosis Types 1 and 2 Hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis type 1 is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathologic variants of SL34A1, which encodes a phosphate transporter in the proximal tubule. Pathologic variants in the same gene can also cause Fanconi syndrome and infantile hypercalcemia. Hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis type 2 is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from pathologic variants in SLC9A3R1 that cause renal phosphate wasting. Laboratory findings and treatment for these disorders are similar to HHRH, with the exception of the features of Fanconi syndrome (see later and Chapter 569) in some patients with the type 1 disorder. Overproduction of FGF-23 Tumor-induced osteomalacia is more common in adults; in children it can produce classic rachitic findings. Most tumors are mesenchymal in origin and are usually benign, small, and located in bone. These tumors secrete FGF-23 and produce a biochemical phenotype similar to XLH, including urinary phosphate wasting, hypophosphatemia, ele- vated ALP levels, and low or inappropriately normal 1,25-D levels (see Table 69.4). Curative treatment is excision of the tumor. If the tumor cannot be removed, treatment is identical to that for XLH, including use of burosumab. Renall phosphate wasting leading to hypophosphatemia and rickets (or osteomalacia in adults) is a potential complication in McCune-Albright syndrome, an entity that includes the triad of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, hyperpigmented macules, and poly- endocrinopathy (see Chapter 600.06). Affected patients have inap- propriately low levels of 1,25-D and elevated ALP levels. The renal phosphate wasting and inhibition of 1,25-D synthesis are related to the polyostotic fibrous dysplasia. Patients have elevated FGF- 23, presumably caused by the dysplastic bone. Hypophosphatemic rickets can also occur in children with isolated polyostotic fibrous dysplasia. Although it is rarely possible, removal of the abnormal bone can cure this disorder in children with McCune-Albright syn- drome. Most patients receive the same conventional treatment as children with XLH, with case reports describing off-label treatment with burosumab. Bisphosphonate treatment decreases the pain and fracture risk associated with the bone lesions. Rickets is an unusual complication of epidermal nevus syn- drome, which is caused by somatic pathologic variants (Ras family of genes and others). It is called cutaneous skeletal hypophospha- temia syndrome when associated with hypophosphatemic rickets or osteomalacia (see Chapter 692). Excessive production of FGF-23 causes renal phosphate wasting and an inappropriately normal or low level of 1,25-D. The timing of presentation with rickets var- ies from infancy to early adolescence. Hypophosphatemia and rickets have resolved after excision of the epidermal nevi in some patients, but not in others. In most the skin lesions are too extensive to be removed, necessitating treatment with phosphorus supple- mentation and 1,25-D. Rickets caused by phosphate wasting is an extremely rare complication in children with neurofibromatosis (see Chapter 636.1). Fanconi Syndrome Fanconi syndrome is secondary to generalized dysfunction of the renal proximal tubule (see Chapter 569.1). There are renal losses of phosphate, amino acids, bicarbonate, glucose, urate, and other mol- ecules that are normally reabsorbed in the proximal tubule. Some patients have partial dysfunction, with less generalized losses. The most clinically relevant consequences are hypophosphatemia caused by phosphate losses and proximal renal tubular acidosis caused by bicarbonate losses. Patients have rickets as a result of hypophospha- temia, with exacerbation from the chronic metabolic acidosis, which causes bone dissolution. Failure to thrive is a consequence of both rickets and renal tubular acidosis. Treatment is dictated by the etiol- ogy (see Chapter 569). Dent Disease Dent disease is an X-linked disorder usually caused by pathologic variants in the gene encoding a chloride channel expressed in the kidney (CLCN5). Some patients have pathologic variants in the OCRL1 gene, which can also cause Lowe syndrome (see Chapter 571.3). Affected males have variable manifestations, including hematuria, nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis, rickets, and chronic kidney disease. Almost all patients have low-molecular-weight pro- teinuria and hypercalciuria. Other, less universal abnormalities are aminoaciduria, glycosuria, hypophosphatemia, and hypokalemia. Rickets occurs in approximately 25% of patients, and it responds to oral phosphorus supplements. Some patients also need 1,25-D, but this treatment should be used cautiously because it can worsen the hypercalciuria. RICKETS OF PREMATURITY Rickets in very low birthweight infants has become a significant prob- lem as the survival rate for this group of infants has increased (see Chapter 119.2). Pathogenesis The transfer of calcium and phosphorus from mother to fetus occurs throughout pregnancy, but 80% occurs during the third tri- mester. Premature birth interrupts this process, with rickets devel- oping when the premature infant does not have an adequate supply of calcium and phosphorus to support mineralization of the grow- ing skeleton. Most cases of rickets of prematurity occur in infants with a birth- weight < 1,000 g. It is more likely to develop in infants with lower 

birthweight and younger gestational age. Rickets occurs because unsupplemented breast milk and standard infant formula do not contain enough calcium and phosphorus to supply the needs of the premature infant. Other risk factors include cholestatic jaundice, a complicated neonatal course, prolonged use of parenteral nutri- tion, the use of soy formula, and medications such as diuretics and corticosteroids. Clinical Manifestations Rickets of prematurity occurs 1-4 months after birth. Infants can have nontraumatic fractures, especially of the legs, arms, and ribs. Most fractures are not suspected clinically. Because fractures and softening of the ribs lead to decreased chest compliance, some infants have respiratory distress from atelectasis and poor ventila- tion. This rachitic respiratory distress usually develops >5 weeks after birth, distinguishing it from the early-onset respiratory dis- ease of premature infants. These infants have poor linear growth, with negative effects on growth persisting beyond 1 year of age. An additional long-term effect is enamel hypoplasia. Poor bone min- eralization can contribute to dolichocephaly. There may be classic rachitic findings, such as frontal bossing, rachitic rosary (see Fig. 69.1), craniotabes, and widened wrists and ankles (see Table 69.3). Most infants with rickets of prematurity have no clinical manifesta- tions, and the diagnosis is based on radiographic and laboratory Laboratory Findings Because of inadequate intake, the serum phosphorus level is low or low-normal in patients with rickets of prematurity. The renal response is appropriate, with conservation of phosphate leading to a low urine phosphate level; tubular reabsorption of phosphate is >95%. Most patients have normal levels of 25-D unless there has been inadequate intake or poor absorption (discussed earlier). The hypophosphatemia stimulates renal la-hydroxylase, so levels of 1,25-D are high or high-normal. These high levels can contribute to bone demineralization because 1,25-D stimulates bone resorp- tion. Serum levels of calcium are low, normal, or high, and patients often have hypercalciuria. Elevated serum calcium levels and hyper- calciuria are secondary to increased intestinal absorption and bone dissolution caused by elevated 1,25-D levels and inability to deposit calcium in bone because of an inadequate phosphorus supply. The hypercalciuria indicates that phosphorus is the limiting nutrient for bone mineralization, although increased provision of phospho- rus alone often cannot correct the mineralization defect; increased calcium is also necessary. Thus there is an inadequate supply of cal- cium and phosphorus, but the deficiency in phosphorus is greater. Alkaline phosphatase levels are often elevated, but some affected infants have normal levels. In some cases, normal ALP levels may be secondary to resolution of the bone demineralization because of an adequate mineral supply despite the continued presence of radiologic changes, which take longer to resolve. However, ALP lev- els may be normal despite active disease. No single blood test is 100% sensitive for the diagnosis of rickets. The diagnosis should be suspected in infants with ALP >5-6 times the upper limit of nor- mal (UL) for adults (unless there is concomitant liver disease) or phosphorus <5.6 mg/dL. The diagnosis is confirmed by radiologic evidence of rickets, which is best seen on radiographs of the wrists and ankles. Films of the arms and legs might reveal fractures. The rachitic rosary may be visible on chest radiograph. Unfortunately, radiographs cannot show early demineralization of bone because changes are not evident until there is >20-30% reduction in the Diagnosis Because many premature infants have no overt clinical manifestations of rickets, screening tests are recommended. These tests should include Chapter 69 • Vitamin D Deficiency (Rickets) and Excess 479 weekly measurements of calcium, phosphorus, and ALP. Periodic mea- surement of the serum bicarbonate concentration is also important because metabolic acidosis causes dissolution of bone. At least one screening radiograph for rickets at 6-8 weeks of age is appropriate in infants who are at high risk for it; additional films may be indicated in high-risk infants. Prevention Provision of adequate amounts of calcium, phosphorus, and vita- min D significantly decreases the risk of rickets of prematurity. Parenteral nutrition is often necessary initially in very premature infants. In the past, adequate parenteral calcium and phosphorus delivery was difficult because of limits secondary to insolubility of these ions when their concentrations were increased. Current amino acid preparations allow higher concentrations of calcium and phos- phate, decreasing the risk of rickets. Early transition to enteral feed- ings is also helpful. These infants should receive either human milk fortified with calcium and phosphorus or preterm infant formula, which has higher concentrations of calcium and phosphorus than standard formula. Soy formula should be avoided because there is decreased bioavailability of calcium and phosphorus. Increased mineral feedings should continue until the infant weighs 3-3.5 kg. These infants should also receive approximately 400 IU/day of vita- min D through formula and vitamin supplements. Treatment Therapy for rickets of prematurity focuses on ensuring adequate deliv- ery of calcium, phosphorus, and vitamin D. If mineral delivery has been good and there is no evidence of healing, it is important to screen for vitamin D deficiency by measuring serum 25-D. Measurement of PTH, 1,25-D, and urinary calcium and phosphorus may be helpful in DISTAL RENAL TUBULAR ACIDOSIS Distal renal tubular acidosis usually manifests with failure to thrive. Patients have a metabolic acidosis with an inability to acidify the urine appropriately. Hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis are typically pres- ent. The many etiologies include autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant forms. Rickets is variable and responds to alkali therapy (see Fig. 69.5 and Chapter 569.2). HYPERVITAMINOSIS D Etiology Hypervitaminosis D is caused by excessive intake of vitamin D. It can occur with long-term high intake or with a substantial, acute ingestion (see Table 69.1). Most cases are secondary to misuse of prescribed or nonprescription vitamin D supplements, but other cases have been secondary to accidental overfortification of milk, contamination of table sugar, and inadvertent use of vitamin D sup- plements as cooking oil. The recommended upper limits for long- term vitamin D intake are 1,000 IU for children <1 year old and 2,000 IU for older children and adults. Hypervitaminosis D can also result from excessive intake of syn- thetic vitamin D analogs (25-D, 1,25-D). Vitamin D intoxication is never secondary to excessive exposure to sunlight, probably because ultraviolet irradiation can transform vitamin D3 and its precursor into inactive metabolites. Pathogenesis Although vitamin D increases intestinal absorption of calcium, the dominant mechanism of the hypercalcemia is excessive bone resorption. Clinical Manifestations The signs and symptoms of vitamin D intoxication are second- ary to hypercalcemia. GI manifestations include nausea, vomit- ing, poor feeding, constipation, abdominal pain, and pancreatitis. 

480 Part V • Nutrition Possible cardiac findings are hypertension, decreased QT interval, and arrhythmias. The central nervous system effects of hypercalce- mia include lethargy, hypotonia, confusion, disorientation, depres- sion, psychosis, hallucinations, and coma. Hypercalcemia impairs renal concentrating mechanisms, which can lead to polyuria, dehy- dration, and hypernatremia. Hypercalcemia can also lead to acute kidney injury, nephrolithiasis, and nephrocalcinosis, which can result in chronic kidney disease. Deaths are usually associated with arrhythmias or dehydration. Laboratory Findings The classic findings in vitamin D intoxication are hypercalce- mia, elevated levels of 25-D (>100 ng/mL), hypercalciuria, and suppressed PTH. Hyperphosphatemia is also common. Hyper- calciuria can lead to nephrocalcinosis, which is visible on renal ultrasound. Hypercalcemia and nephrocalcinosis can lead to renal insufficiency. Surprisingly, levels of 1,25-D are usually normal. This may result from downregulation of renal la-hydroxylase by the combination of low PTH, hyperphosphatemia, and a direct effect of 1,25-D. The level of free 1,25-D may be high because of displacement from vitamin D-binding proteins by 25-D. Anemia is sometimes present; the mechanism is unknown. Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis The diagnosis is based on the presence of hypercalcemia and an ele- vated serum 25-D level, although children with excess intake of 1,25-D or another synthetic vitamin D preparation have normal levels of 25- D. With careful sleuthing, there is usually a history of excess intake of vitamin D, although in some situations (overfortification of milk by a dairy), the patient and family may be unaware. The differential diagnosis of vitamin D intoxication focuses on other causes of hypercalcemia. Hyperparathyroidism produces hypophospha- temia, whereas vitamin D intoxication usually causes hyperphosphate- mia. Williams syndrome is often suggested by phenotypic features and accompanying cardiac disease. Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia occurs in children taking appropriate doses of vitamin D. Subcutaneous fat necro- sis is a common cause of hypercalcemia in young infants; skin findings are usually present. The hypercalcemia of familial benign hypocalciuric hypercalcemia is mild, asymptomatic, and associated with hypocalciuria. Hypercalcemia of malignancy is an important consideration. Hypercalce- mia may occur on a ketogenic diet. High intake of calcium can also cause hypercalcemia, especially in the presence of renal insufficiency. Inquiring about calcium intake should be part of the history in a patient with hyper- calcemia. Occasionally, patients are intentionally taking high doses of cal- cium and vitamin D. Treatment The treatment of vitamin D intoxication focuses on control of hypercal- cemia. Many patients with hypercalcemia are dehydrated as a result of polyuria from nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, poor oral intake, and vom- iting. Rehydration lowers the serum calcium level by dilution and corrects prerenal azotemia. The resultant increased urine output increases urinary calcium excretion. Urinary calcium excretion is also increased by high urinary sodium excretion. The mainstay of the initial treatment is aggres- sive therapy with normal saline, often in conjunction with a loop diuretic to further increase calcium excretion; this is often adequate for treating mild or moderate hypercalcemia. More significant hypercalcemia usually requires other therapies. Glucocorticoids decrease intestinal absorption of calcium by blocking the action of 1,25-D. There is also a decrease in the lev- els of 25-D and 1,25-D. The usual dosage of prednisone is 1-2 mg/kg/24 hr. Calcitonin, which lowers calcium by inhibiting bone resorption, is a useful adjunct, but its effect is usually not dramatic. There is an excellent response to IV or oral bisphosphonates in vitamin D intoxication. Bisphosphonates inhibit bone resorption through their effects on osteoclasts. Hemodialysis using a low or zero dial- ysate calcium can rapidly lower serum calcium in patients with severe hypercalcemia that is refractory to other measures. Along with controlling hypercalcemia, it is imperative to eliminate the source of excess vitamin D. Additional sources of vitamin D such as multivitamins and fortified foods should be eliminated or reduced. Avoidance of sun exposure, including the use of sunscreen, is prudent. The patient should also restrict calcium intake. Prognosis Most children make a full recovery, but hypervitaminosis D may be fatal or can lead to chronic kidney disease. Because vitamin D is stored in fat, levels can remain elevated for months, necessitating regular monitoring of 25-D, serum calcium, and urine calcium. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 70 Vitamin E Deficiency Larry A. Greenbaum Vitamin E is a fat-soluble vitamin and functions as an antioxidant, but its precise biochemical functions are not known. Vitamin E deficiency can cause hemolysis or neurologic manifestations and occurs in pre- mature infants, in patients with malabsorption, and in an autosomal recessive disorder affecting vitamin E transport. Because of its role as an antioxidant, there is considerable research on vitamin E supplemen- tation in chronic illnesses. PATHOGENESIS The term vitamin E denotes a group of 8 compounds with simi- lar structures and antioxidant activity. The most potent member of these compounds is a-tocopherol, which is also the main form in humans. The best dietary sources of vitamin E are vegetable oils, seeds, nuts, green leafy vegetables, and margarine (see Table 69.1). The majority of vitamin E is located within cell membranes, where it prevents lipid peroxidation and the formation of free radicals. Other antioxidants, such as ascorbic acid, enhance the antioxidant activity of vitamin E. The importance of other functions of vitamin E is still being delineated. Premature infants are particularly susceptible to vitamin E defi- ciency because there is significant transfer of vitamin E during the last trimester of pregnancy. Vitamin E deficiency in premature infants causes thrombocytosis, edema, and hemolysis, potentially causing anemia. The risk of symptomatic vitamin E deficiency was increased by the use of formulas for premature infants that had a high content of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). These formu- las led to a high content of PUFAs in red blood cell membranes, making them more susceptible to oxidative stress, which could be ameliorated by vitamin E. Oxidative stress was augmented by aggressive use of iron supplementation; iron increases the produc- tion of oxygen radicals. The incidence of hemolysis as a result of vitamin E deficiency in premature infants decreased secondary to the use of formulas with a lower content of PUFAs, less aggressive use of iron, and provision of adequate vitamin E. Because vitamin E is plentiful in common foods, primary dietary deficiency is rare except in premature infants and in severe, general- ized malnutrition. Vitamin E deficiency does occur in children with fat malabsorption secondary to the bile acid needed for vitamin E absorption. Although symptomatic disease is most common in children with cholestatic liver disease, it can occur in patients with 

cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, short bowel syndrome, and Crohn disease. The autosomal recessive disorder abetalipoproteinemia causes fat malabsorption, and vitamin E deficiency is a common complication (see Chapter 106). In ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency (AVED), a rare auto- somal recessive disorder, there are pathologic variants in TTPA, the gene for a-tocopherol transfer protein. Patients with this disorder are unable to incorporate vitamin E into lipoproteins before their release from the liver, leading to reduced serum levels of vitamin E. There is no associated fat malabsorption, and absorption of vitamin E from the intestine occurs normally. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS A severe, progressive neurologic disorder occurs in patients with prolonged vitamin E deficiency. Clinical manifestations do not appear until after 1 year of age, even in children with cholestasis since birth. Patients may have cerebellar disease, posterior col- umn dysfunction, and retinal disease. Loss of deep tendon reflexes is usually the initial finding. Subsequent manifestations include limb ataxia (intention tremor, dysdiadochokinesia), truncal ataxia (wide-based, unsteady gait), dysarthria, ophthalmoplegia (limited upward gaze), nystagmus, decreased proprioception (positive Rom- berg test), decreased vibratory sensation, and dysarthria. Some patients have pigmentary retinopathy. Visual field constriction can progress to blindness. Cognition and behavior can also be affected. Myopathy and cardiac arrhythmias are less common findings. In premature infants, hemolysis as a result of vitamin E deficiency typically develops during the second month of life. Edema may also be present. LABORATORY FINDINGS Serum vitamin E levels increase in the presence of high serum lipid levels, even when vitamin E deficiency is present. Therefore vita- min E status is best determined by measuring the ratio of vitamin E to serum lipids; a ratio <0.8 mg/g is abnormal in older children and adults; <0.6 mg/g is abnormal in infants <1 year. Premature infants with hemolysis caused by vitamin E deficiency also often have elevated platelet counts. Neurologic involvement can cause abnormal somatosensory evoked potentials and nerve conduction studies. Abnormalities on electroreti- nography can precede physical examination findings in patients with retinal involvement. DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS be a lin thy repeat is Premature infants with unexplained hemolytic anemia after the first month of life, especially if thrombocytosis is present, either should be empirically treated with vitamin E or should have serum vitamin E and lipid levels measured. Children with neurologic findings and a disease that causes fat malabsorption should have their vitamin E sta- tus evaluated. Because children with AVED do not have symptoms of malabsorp- tion, a correct diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion. Friedreich ataxia has been misdiagnosed in some patients (see Chapter 637.1). Children with unexplained ataxia should be screened for vitamin E deficiency. TREATMENT For correction of deficiency in neonates, the dose of vitamin E is 25-50 units/day for 1 week, followed by adequate dietary intake. Children with deficiency as a result of malabsorption should receive 1 unit/kg/day, with the dose adjusted based on levels; ongoing treat- ment is necessary. Children with AVED normalize their serum vitamin E levels with high doses of vitamin E and require ongoing PROGNOSIS The hemolytic anemia in infants resolves with correction of the vitamin E deficiency. Some neurologic manifestations of vitamin E Chapter 71 • Vitamin K Deficiency 481 deficiency may be reversible with early treatment, but many patients have little or no improvement. Importantly, treatment prevents progression. PREVENTION Premature infants should receive sufficient vitamin E through for- mula or breast milk fortifier and formula without a high content of PUFAs. Children at risk for vitamin E deficiency as a result of mal- absorption should be screened for deficiency and given adequate vitamin E supplementation. Vitamin preparations with high con- tent of all the fat-soluble vitamins are available. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. Chapter 71 Vitamin K Deficiency Larry A. Greenbaum Vitamin K is necessary for the synthesis of clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X; deficiency of vitamin K can result in clinically significant bleed- ing. Vitamin K deficiency typically affects infants, who experience a transient deficiency related to inadequate intake, or patients of any age who have decreased vitamin K absorption. Mild vitamin K deficiency can affect long-term bone and vascular health (see Chapters 142 and 529). PATHOGENESIS Vitamin K is a group of compounds that have a common naph- thoquinone ring structure (see Table 69.1). Phylloquinone, called vitamin K,, is present in a variety of dietary sources, with green leafy vegetables, liver, and certain legumes and plant oils having the highest content. Vitamin K, is the form used to fortify foods and as a medication in the United States. Vitamin K, is a group of compounds called menaquinones, which are produced by intesti- nal bacteria. There is uncertainty regarding the relative importance of intestinally produced vitamin K2. Menaquinones are also present in meat, especially liver, and cheese. A menaquinone is used phar- macologically in some countries. Vitamin K is a cofactor for y-glutamyl carboxylase, an enzyme that performs posttranslational carboxylation, converting gluta- mate residues in proteins to y-carboxyglutamate (Gla). The Gla residues, by facilitating calcium binding, are necessary for protein The classic Gla-containing proteins involved in blood coagula- tion that are decreased in vitamin K deficiency are factors Il (pro- thrombin), VII, IX, and X. Vitamin K deficiency causes a decrease in proteins C and S, which inhibit blood coagulation, and pro- tein Z, which also has a role in coagulation. All these proteins are made only in the liver, except for protein S, a product of various Gla-containing proteins are also involved in bone biology (osteo- calcin and protein S) and vascular biology (matrix Gla protein and protein S). Based on the presence of reduced levels of Gla, these pro- teins appear more sensitive than the coagulation proteins to subtle vitamin K deficiency. Evidence suggests that mild vitamin K defi- ciency might have a deleterious effect on long-term bone strength and vascular health. Because it is fat soluble, vitamin K requires the presence of bile salts for its absorption. Unlike other fat-soluble vitamins, there are 

482 Part V • Nutrition limited body stores of vitamin K. In addition, there is high turnover of vitamin K, and the vitamin K-dependent clotting factors have a short half-life. Thus symptomatic vitamin K deficiency can develop within weeks when there is inadequate supply because of low intake or malabsorption. There are three forms of vitamin K deficiency bleeding (VKDB) of the newborn (see Chapter 142). Early VKDB was formerly called classic hemorrhagic disease of the newborn and occurs at 1-14 days of age. Early VKDB is secondary to low stores of vitamin K at birth as a result of the poor transfer of vitamin K across the placenta and inadequate intake during the first few days of life. In addition, there is no intestinal synthesis of vitamin K2 because the newborn gut is sterile. Early VKDB occurs mostly in breastfed infants as a con- sequence of the low vitamin K content of breast milk (formula is fortified). Delayed feeding is an additional risk factor. Late VKDB most often occurs at 2-12 weeks of age, although cases can occur up to 6 months after birth. Almost all cases are in breastfed infants because of the low vitamin K content of breast milk. An additional risk factor is occult malabsorption of vitamin K, as occurs in children with undiagnosed cystic fibrosis or chole- static liver disease (e.g., biliary atresia, a,-antitrypsin deficiency). Without vitamin K prophylaxis, the incidence is 4-10 per 100,000 The third form of VKDB of the newborn occurs at birth or shortly thereafter. It is secondary to maternal intake of medications (warfarin, phenobarbital, phenytoin) that cross the placenta and interfere with VKDB as a result of fat malabsorption can occur in children of any age. Potential etiologies include cholestatic liver disease, pancreatic disease, and intestinal disorders (celiac sprue, inflammatory bowel dis- ease, short bowel syndrome). Prolonged diarrhea can cause vitamin K deficiency, especially in breastfed infants. Children with cystic fibrosis are most likely to have vitamin K deficiency if they have pancreatic insufficiency and liver disease. Beyond infancy, low dietary intake by itself never causes vitamin K deficiency. However, the combination of poor intake and the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics that eliminate the intestine's vitamin Ka-producing bacteria can cause vitamin K deficiency. This sce- nario is especially common in the intensive care unit. Vitamin K deficiency can also occur in patients who receive total parenteral nutrition (TPN) without vitamin K supplementation. CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS In early VKDB, the most common sites of bleeding are the gas- trointestinal (GI) tract, mucosal and cutaneous tissue, umbilical stump, and the postcircumcision site; intracranial bleeding is less common. GI blood loss can be severe enough to require a transfu- sion. In contrast, the most common site of bleeding in late VKDB is intracranial, although cutaneous and GI bleeding may be the initial manifestation. Intracranial bleeding can cause convulsions, permanent neurologic sequelae, or death. In some patients with late VKDB, the presence of an underlying disorder may be suggested by jaundice or failure to thrive (malnutrition). Older children with vitamin K deficiency can present with bruising, mucocutaneous bleeding, or more serious bleeding. Laboratory Findings In patients with bleeding as a result of vitamin K deficiency, the prothrombin time (PT) is prolonged. The PT must be interpreted based on the patients age because it is normally prolonged in new- borns (see Chapters 142 and 524). The partial thromboplastin time (PTT) is usually prolonged, but may be normal in early deficiency. Factor VII has the shortest half-life of the coagulation factors and is the first to be affected by vitamin K deficiency, but isolated factor VII deficiency does not affect PTT. The platelet count and fibrino- gen level are normal. When there is mild vitamin K deficiency, the PI is normal, but there are elevated levels of the undercarboxylated forms of the proteins that are normally carboxylated in the presence of vitamin K. These undercarboxylated proteins are called proteins induced by vitamin K absence (PIVKA). Measurement of undercarboxyl- ated factor II (PIVKA-II) can be used to detect mild vitamin K deficiency. Determination of blood vitamin K levels is less useful because of significant variation based on recent dietary intake; lev- els do not always reflect tissue stores. DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS The diagnosis is established by the presence of a prolonged PT that corrects rapidly after administration of vitamin K, which stops the active bleeding. Other possible causes of bleeding and a prolonged PT include disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), liver fail- ure, and rare hereditary deficiencies of clotting factors. DIC, which is usually secondary to sepsis, is associated with thrombocytopenia, low fibrinogen, and elevated D-dimers. Severe liver disease results in decreased production of clotting factors; the PT does not fully correct with administration of vitamin K. Children with a heredi- tary disorder have a deficiency in a specific clotting factor (I, II, V, VII, X). Coumarin derivatives inhibit the action of vitamin K by prevent- ing its recycling to an active form after it functions as a cofactor for Y-glutamyl carboxylase. Bleeding can occur with overdosage of the common anticoagulant warfarin or with ingestion of rodent poison, which contains a coumarin derivative. High doses of salicylates also inhibit vitamin K regeneration, potentially leading to a prolonged PT and clinical bleeding. TREATMENT Infants with VKDB should receive 1 mg of parenteral vitamin K. The PT should decrease within 6 hours and normalize within 24 hours. For rapid correction in adolescents, the parenteral dose is 2.5-10 mg. In addition to vitamin K, a patient with severe, life- threatening bleeding should receive an infusion of fresh-frozen plasma (FFP), which corrects the coagulopathy rapidly. Children with vitamin K deficiency caused by malabsorption require chronic administration of high doses of oral vitamin K (2.5 mg twice/week to 5 mg/day). Parenteral vitamin K may be necessary if oral vitamin K is ineffective. Administration of either oral or parenteral vitamin K soon after birth prevents early VKDB of the newborn. In contrast, a single dose of oral vitamin K does not prevent a substantial number of cases of late VKDB. However, a single intramuscular (IM) injection of vitamin K (1 mg), the current practice in the United States, is almost universally effective, except in children with severe malab- sorption. This increased efficacy of the IM form is thought to be the result of a depot effect. Concerns about an association between par- enteral vitamin K at birth and the later development of malignancy are unsubstantiated. Oral vitamin K is a less effective alternative for parents who refuse IM vitamin K, but multiple doses are necessary and rely on home administration. Discontinuing the offending medications before delivery can prevent VKDB attributable to maternal medications. If this is not possible, administration of vitamin K to the mother may be help- ful. In addition, the neonate should receive parenteral vitamin K immediately after birth. If parenteral vitamin K does not correct the coagulopathy rapidly, the child should receive FFP. Children who are at high risk for malabsorption of vitamin K should receive supplemental vitamin K and periodic measurement Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health. Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 

Chapter 72 Micronutrient Mineral Deficiencies Larry A. Greenbaum Micronutrients include vitamins (see Chapters 66-71) and trace ele- ments. By definition, a trace element is <0.01% of the body weight. Trace elements have a variety of essential functions (Table 72.1), although the evidence is not always strong (chromium). With the exception of iron deficiency, trace element deficiency is uncommon in developed countries, but some defciencies (iodine, zinc, selenium) are important public health problems in a number of developing countries. Because of low nutritional requirements and plentiful supply, deficien- cies of some of the trace elements are extremely rare in humans and Table 72.1 ELEMENT Chromium Trace Elements PHYSIOLOGY Potentiates the action of insulin Copper Absorbed via specific intestinal transporter Circulates bound to ceruloplasmin Enzyme cofactor (superoxide EFFECTS OF DEFICIENCY Impaired glucose tolerance, peripheral neuropathy, and encephalopathy Microcytic anemia, osteoporosis, neutropenia, neurologic symptoms, depigmentation of hair and skin Fluoride formation ctive tissue Incorporated into bone lodine Component of thyroid hormone (see Chapter 580) Chapter 72 • Micronutrient Mineral Deficiencies 483 typically occur in patients receiving unusual diets or prolonged total parenteral nutrition without adequate delivery of a specific trace ele- ment. Trace element deficiencies can also occur in children with short bowel syndrome or malabsorption. Excess intake of trace elements is uncommon, but can result from environmental exposure or overuse of supplements (see Table 72.1). For a number of reasons, children are especially susceptible to trace element deficiency. First, growth creates an increased demand for most trace elements. Second, some organs are more likely to sustain perma- nent damage because of trace element deficiency during childhood. The developing brain is particularly vulnerable to the consequences of cer- tain deficiency states (iron, iodide). Similarly, adequate fluoride is most critical for dental health during childhood. Third, children, especially in the developing world, are more prone to gastrointestinal disorders that can cause trace element deficiencies because of malabsorption. A normal diet provides adequate intake of most trace elements. How- ever, the intake of certain trace elements varies significantly in different geographic locations. Iodide-containing food is plentiful near the ocean, but inland areas often have inadequate sources, leading to goiter and hypothyroidism. lodine deficiency is not a problem in the United States because of the widespread use of iodized salt; however, symptomatic Iron Component of hemoglobin, and olobin, yochromes, Dental caries (see Chapter 358) Hypothyroidism (see Chapters 601 and 603) Anemia (see Chapter 504), deniased alertness, impaired Manganese Enzyme cofactor Molybdenum Selenium Enzyme cofactor (xanthine oxidase and others) Enzyme cofactor (prevents oxidative damage) Hypercholesterolemia, weight loss, decreased clotting proteins* Tachycardia, tachypnea, night blindness, irritability, coma* Cardiomyopathy (Keshan disease), myopathy Zinc Enzyme cofactor Constituent of zinc-finger proteins, which regulate gene transcription Decreased growth, dermatitis of exes mipaired armunity. poor wound healing, hypogonadism, diarrhea Supplements are beneficial in diarrhea and improve neuro- developmental outcomes *These deficiency states have been reported only in case reports associated with parenteral nutrition or highly unusual diets. EFFECTS OF EXCESS Unknown DIETARY SOURCES Meat, grains, fruits, and vegetables Acute: nausea, emesis, abdominal pain, coma, and hepatic necrosis Chronic toxicity (liver and brain injury) occurs in Wilson disease (see Chapter 405.2) and secondary to excess intake (see Chapter 405.3) Vegetables, grains, nuts, liver, margarine, legumes, corn oil Chronic: dental fluorosis (see Chapter 353) Hypothyroidism and goiter Toothpaste, fluoridated water Saltwater fish, iodized salt (see Chapters 603 and 605); maternal excess can cause congenital hypothyroidism and goiter (see Chapter 603.1) Aureling, charter abdominal Deficiency Can dods Deficiency can also Chronic ed hys usually result from blood loss (hookworm infestation, secondary to hereditary menorrhagia) disorders (see Chapter 511); causes organ dysfunction Neurologic manifestations, Nuts, meat, grains, tea cholestatic jaundice Hyperuricemia and increased Legumes, grains, liver risk of gout Nausea, diarrhea, neurologic Meat, seafood, whole manifestations, nail and hair grains, garlic changes, garlic odor Abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting Meat, shellfish, whole grains, legumes, cheese Can worsen copper deficiency 

484 Part V • Nutrition iodine deficiency (goiter, hypothyroidism) is common in many devel- oping countries. Selenium content of the soil and consequently of food is also quite variable. Dietary selenium deficiency (associated with car- diomyopathy) occurs in certain locations, such as some parts of China. The consequences of severe isolated trace mineral deficiency are illustrated in certain genetic disorders. The manifestations of Menkes disease are caused by pathologic variants in the gene coding for a pro- tein that facilitates intestinal copper absorption (see Chapters 639.5 and 703). These pathologic variants result in severe copper deficiency; subcutaneous copper is an effective treatment. Nutritional copper deficiency has been reported in children receiving unsupplemented parenteral nutrition and in children on a ketogenic diet (with associ- ated neutropenia and anemia). The recessive disorder acrodermatitis enteropathica is secondary to malabsorption of zinc (see Chapter 712). These patients respond dramatically to zinc supplementation. Children can have apparently asymptomatic deficiencies of certain trace elements but still benefit from supplementation. As an example, zinc is highly effective in treating children before or during diarrheal illnesses in the developing world. Zinc deficiency is quite common in the developing world and is often associated with malnutrition or other micronutrient deficiencies (iron). Chronic zinc deficiency is associated with dwarfism, hypogo- nadism, dermatitis, and T-cell immunodeficiency. Diets rich in phy- tates bind zinc, impairing its absorption. Zinc supplementation in at-risk children reduces the incidence and severity of diarrhea, pneu- monia, and possibly malaria. In developing countries, children who have diarrhea may benefit from zinc supplementation, especially if there is underlying malnutrition. Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography. 