534
PART
VII
Emergency Medicine, Critical 
Care, and Anesthesia
The overwhelming majority of the 27 million children who present 
annually for emergency care in the United States are seen at community- 
based general emergency departments (EDs). Visits to children’s hospital 
EDs account for just 10% of initial ED encounters. Additionally, across 
emergency medical services, children account for approximately 10% of 
all transports. This distribution suggests that the greatest opportunity to 
optimize care for acutely ill or injured pediatric patients, on a population 
basis, occurs broadly as part of a systems- based approach to emergency 
services, an approach that incorporates the unique needs of children at 
every level. Conceptually, emergency medical services for children are 
characterized by an integrated, continuum- of- care model (
Fig. 77.1
). 
The model is designed such that patient care flows seamlessly from the 
primary care medical home through transport and on to hospital- based 
definitive care. It includes the following five principal domains of activity:
 1.  Prevention, both primary and secondary
 2.  Out- of- hospital care, both emergency response and prehospital 
transport
 3.  Hospital- based care: ED and inpatient, including critical care
 4.  Interfacility transport, as necessary, for definitive or pediatric medi
-
cal and surgical subspecialty care (see 
Chapter 77.1
)
 5.  Rehabilitation
The federal 
Emergency Medical Services for Children (EMSC)
 
program of the Health Resources and Services Administration Mater
-
nal and Child Health Bureau has stewarded improvements in the care 
of children in the context of the continuum- of- care model. The pro
-
grammatic mission of the EMSC program is as follows:
	•		To	ensure	U.S.	emergency	care	systems	across	the	continuum	of	care	
are pediatric- ready, meaning pediatric- specific needs are incorpo
-
rated into every aspect of patient care, including patient safety prac
-
tices, equipment and supplies, competency requirements, policies 
and procedures, quality improvement efforts, and administrative 
oversight and coordination of care.
	•		To	ensure	access	to	high-	quality	emergency	medical	care	for	ill	or	
injured children and adolescents of all ages regardless of geographic 
location.
	•		To	ensure	that	pediatric	services	are	well	integrated	into	an	emer
-
gency medical services (EMS) system and backed by optimal re
-
sources.
	•		To	ensure	that	the	entire	spectrum	of	emergency	services—includ
-
ing primary prevention of illness and injury, acute care, and reha
-
bilitation—is	provided	to	infants,	children,	and	adolescents	at	a	level	
equal to that of adults.
PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN AND OFFICE 
PREPAREDNESS
The primary care physician (PCP) has multiple important roles in the 
EMS system. Through anticipatory guidance, the PCP can help shape 
the attitudes, knowledge, and behaviors of parent and child, with the 
primary goal of preventing acute medical events, such as injury and 
exacerbations of illness. The point- of- care initiation for many acute 
problems is often the PCP office. From the standpoint of personnel, 
equipment, training, and protocols, the PCP office setting must be 
adequately prepared to initially manage acute and emergency exacer
-
bations of common pediatric conditions, such as respiratory distress 
and seizures. Furthermore, on rare occasion, the PCP office environ
-
ment may be confronted with a child in clinical extremis who requires 
resuscitation and stabilization. It is therefore incumbent on the PCP 
not only to ensure access to EMS, that is, 911 system activation, but 
also to ensure that there is adequate equipment and supplies and on- 
site cognitive and psychomotor skill preparation to deal with such an 
emergency. 
Office preparedness
 requires training and continuing 
education for staff members, protocols for emergency interventions, 
ready availability of appropriate resuscitation drugs and equipment, 
and knowledge of local EMS resources and ED capabilities. PCPs can 
also play a pivotal role in informing and advocating for pediatric emer
-
gency and disaster readiness for families (especially those of children 
and youth with special healthcare needs) and in local EMS agencies, 
schools and childcare programs, and community hospitals. In all com
-
munities, the medical home plays a vital role in promoting family read
-
iness for emergencies and disasters.
Staff Training and Continuing Education
It is a reasonable expectation that all office staff, including reception
-
ists and medical assistants, be trained in cardiopulmonary resuscita
-
tion (CPR) with recertification maintained every 2 years. Nurses and 
physicians should also have training in a systematic approach to pedi
-
atric resuscitation that optimizes performance of high- quality CPR. 
Core knowledge may be obtained through standardized courses in 
advanced life support (ALS)
 offered by national medical associa
-
tions and professional organizations. Frequent practice and timely 
Chapter 
77
Emergency Medical 
 
Services for Children
Charles G. Macias, Katherine E. Remick, 
and Steven E. Krug
Emergency responseInjury preventionInterfacility transportEmergency MedicalServices for ChildrenHospital careRehabilitationPrehospital care
Fig. 77.1
 The emergency medical services for children (EMSC) contin
-
uum of care. Seriously ill and injured children interface with a large num
-
ber of healthcare personnel as they move through the EMSC system.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77
 u 
Emergency Medical  Services for Children 
535
recertification are important for knowledge retention and skill main
-
tenance. Examples include the Pediatric Advanced Life Support 
(PALS) and Pediatric Emergency Assessment, Recognition and Sta
-
bilization (PEARS) courses sponsored by the American Heart Asso
-
ciation (AHA), the Advanced Pediatric Life Support (APLS) course 
sponsored by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and Ameri
-
can College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), and the Emergency 
Nurses Pediatric Course (ENPC) sponsored by the Emergency Nurses 
Association (ENA).
 
Protocols
Standardized protocols for telephone triage of seriously ill or injured 
children are essential. When a child’s clinical status is guarded and pre
-
hospital care is available, ambulance transport in the care of trained 
personnel is always preferable to transport by other means (e.g., pri
-
vate vehicle). This obviates the potentially serious medical conse
-
quences of relying on distraught, often untrained, parents who lack 
essential equipment and supplies to provide even 
basic life support 
(BLS)
 measures to an unstable child during transport. Practitioners 
can work with their regional pediatric emergency care resource cen
-
ter (e.g., children’s hospital, academic medical center, trauma center) 
to develop and maintain written protocols for office- based manage
-
ment of a range of conditions, including anaphylaxis, cardiopulmo
-
nary arrest, head trauma, ingestions, shock, status asthmaticus, status 
epilepticus, extremity injuries, and upper airway obstruction. Regular 
practice using mock code scenarios improves office- based practitioner 
and staff performance and self- efficacy in managing these problems.
 
Resuscitation Equipment
Availability of necessary equipment is a vital part of an emergency 
response. Every physician’s office should have essential resuscitation 
equipment and medications packaged in a weight- based pediatric 
resuscitation cart or kit (
Table	77.1
). This cart or kit should be checked 
on a regular basis and kept in an accessible location known to all office 
staff. Outdated medication, a laryngoscope with a failed light source, 
or an empty oxygen tank represents a potential catastrophe in a resus
-
citation scenario. Such an incident can be easily avoided if an equip
-
ment checklist and regular maintenance schedule are implemented. A 
pediatric kit that includes posters to reinforce clinical management and 
procedures, a drug- dosing formulary, and a color- coded length- based 
resuscitation tape specifying weight and emergency equipment size are 
invaluable in avoiding critical therapeutic errors during resuscitation.
To	facilitate	emergency	response	when	a	child	needs	rapid	interven
-
tion in the office, all personnel should have designated roles. Organiz
-
ing a “rapid response team” within the office ensures that necessary 
equipment is made available to the physician in charge, an appropriate 
medical record detailing all interventions and the child’s response is 
generated, and the 911 call for EMS response or a critical care transport 
team is made in a timely fashion. Regular practice for these infrequent 
events will promote timely response when needed.
 
Transport
Once efforts to stabilize the child have begun, a decision must be made 
on how best to transport a child to a facility capable of providing defini
-
tive care. If a child requires airway or cardiovascular support, has an 
altered mental state or unstable vital signs, or has significant potential 
to deteriorate en route, it is not appropriate to send the child via pri
-
vately owned vehicle, regardless of proximity to a hospital. Even when 
an ambulance is called, it is the PCP’s responsibility to initiate essen
-
tial life support measures and to attempt to stabilize the child before 
transport.
In metropolitan centers with numerous public and private ambu
-
lance agencies, the PCP must be knowledgeable about the scope of 
service provided by each. The availability of BLS vs ALS services, 
the configuration of the transport team, and pediatric expertise vary 
greatly among agencies and across jurisdictions. BLS services provide 
basic support of airway, breathing, and circulation, whereas ALS units 
are capable of providing resuscitation drugs and procedural interven
-
tions as well. Some communities may have only BLS services available, 
whereas others may have a two- tiered system, providing both BLS and 
ALS. It may be appropriate to consider medical air transport when 
definitive or specialized care is not available within the community or 
when ground transport times are prolonged. In that case, initial trans
-
port via ground to an appropriate helicopter landing zone or a local 
hospital for interval stabilization may be undertaken, pending arrival 
able 77.1 
 
  Recommended Drugs and Equipment for 
 
Pediatric Office Emergencies
DRUGS/EQUIPMENT
PRIORITY
DRUGS
Oxygen
E
Albuterol for inhalation
E
Epinephrine (1:1,000 [1 mg/mL])
E
Activated charcoal
S
Antibiotics
S
Anticonvulsants (diazepam/lorazepam)
S
Corticosteroids (parenteral/oral)
S
Dextrose (25%)
S
Diphenhydramine (parenteral, 50 mg/mL)
S
Epinephrine (1:10,000 [0.1 mg/mL])
S
Atropine sulfate (0.1 mg/mL)
S
Naloxone (0.4 mg/mL)
S
Sodium bicarbonate (4.2%)
S
INTRAVENOUS FLUIDS
Normal saline (0.9 NS) 
or
 lactated Ringer solution 
 
(500- mL bags)
S
5% dextrose, 0.45 NS (500- mL bags)
S
EQUIPMENT FOR AIRWAY MANAGEMENT
Oxygen and delivery system
E
Bag- valve- mask (450 mL and 1,000 mL)
E
Clear oxygen masks, breather and non- rebreather, with 
reservoirs (infant, child, adult)
E
Suction device, tonsil tip, bulb syringe
E
Nebulizer (or metered- dose inhaler with spacer/mask)
E
Oropharyngeal airways (sizes 00- 5)
E
Pulse oximeter
E
Nasopharyngeal airways (sizes 12- 30F)
S
Magill forceps (pediatric, adult)
S
Suction catheters (sizes 5- 16F and Yankauer suction tip)
S
Nasogastric tubes (sizes 6- 14F)
S
Laryngoscope handle (pediatric, adult) with extra 
 
batteries, bulbs
S
Laryngoscope blades (straight 0- 2; curved 2- 3)
S
Endotracheal tubes (uncuffed 2.5- 5.5; cuffed 6.0- 8.0)
S
Stylets (pediatric, adult)
S
Esophageal intubation detector or end- tidal carbon 
dioxide detector
S
EQUIPMENT FOR VASCULAR ACCESS AND FLUID 
 
MANAGEMENT
Butterfly needles (19- 25 gauge)
S
Catheter- over- needle device (14- 24 gauge)
S
Arm boards, tape, tourniquet
S
Intraosseous needles (16 and 18 gauge)
S
Intravenous tubing, micro- drip
S
MISCELLANEOUS EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES
Color- coded tape or preprinted drug doses
E
Cardiac arrest board/backboard
E
Sphygmomanometer (infant, child, adult, thigh cuffs)
E
Splints, sterile dressings
E
Automated external defibrillator with pediatric 
 
capabilities
S
Spot glucose test
S
Stiff neck collars (small/large)
S
Heating source (overhead warmer/infrared lamp)
S
E, essential; S, strongly suggested.
From Frush K, American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Pediatric Emergency 
Medicine. Policy statement- preparation for emergencies in the offices of pediatricians 
and pediatric primary care providers. 
Pediatrics
. 2007;120:200- 212. Reaffirmed in 
Pediatrics
. 2011;128:e748.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

536 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
of the air transport team. Independent of whether a child is to be 
transported by air or ground, copies of the pertinent medical records 
and any imaging or laboratory studies should be sent with the patient 
and a call made to the physician at the receiving facility to alert them 
to the referral and any treatments administered. Such notification is 
not merely a courtesy; direct physician- to- physician communication 
is essential for optimal care quality and to ensure adequate transmis
-
sion of patient care information, to allow mobilization of necessary 
resources in the ED, and to redirect the transport if the emergency 
physician believes that the child would be more optimally treated at 
an alternative facility.
 
PEDIATRIC PREHOSPITAL CARE
Prehospital care
 refers to emergency assistance rendered by trained 
emergency medical personnel before a child reaches a treating medi
-
cal facility. The goals of prehospital care are to further minimize sys
-
temic insult or injury through a series of well- defined and appropriate 
interventions and serve as the first link in high- quality emergency care. 
Prehospital emergency care services embrace patient safety, family- 
centered care, and timely and effective interventions as core tenets. 
Most U.S. communities have a formalized EMS system; the organi
-
zational structure and nature of emergency medical response depend 
greatly on local demographics and population base. EMS may be pro
-
vided by volunteers or career professionals working in a fire depart
-
ment–based or independent third- service response system. All EMS 
and fire- based agencies have an identified medical director who defines 
provider competencies and scope of practice. Key points to recognize 
in negotiation of the juncture between the community physician and 
the local EMS system include access to the system, provider capability, 
and destination determination.
Access to the EMS System
Virtually all Americans have access to the 911 telephone service that 
provides direct access to a dispatcher who coordinates police, fire, 
and EMS responses. Many communities have a next- generation 911 
system, in which the location of the caller is automatically provided 
to the call taker and/or dispatcher regardless of landline or mobile 
device use, permitting emergency response even if the caller, such 
as a young child, cannot give an address. Next- generation 911 also 
provides text- messaging capabilities. The extent of medical training 
for call takers and dispatchers varies among communities, as do the 
protocols by which they assign an emergency response level (BLS 
vs ALS). Many dispatch centers have adopted the Medical Priority 
Dispatch System (MPDS) to use standardized protocols and prear
-
rival/postdispatch instructions. MPDS requires emergency medical 
dispatchers to ask a series of questions that determine the appropri
-
ate level of priority and EMS response. In some smaller communi
-
ties, no coordinated dispatch exists, and emergency medical calls 
are handled by the local law enforcement agency or fire department. 
When activating the 911 system, the physician must make clear to 
the dispatcher the nature of the medical emergency and the condi
-
tion of the child.
 
Provider Capability
There are many levels of training for prehospital EMS providers, rang
-
ing from individuals capable of providing only first aid to those trained 
and licensed to provide ALS. All EMS personnel, whether basic 
emer
-
gency medical technicians (EMTs)
 or paramedics, receive some ini
-
tial training in pediatric emergencies; however, in most programs the 
dedicated time allotted to pediatric emergencies is minimal. Further
-
more, state requirements vary for pediatric continuing education, and 
exposure to critically ill or injured children in the prehospital setting is 
infrequent, even in urban settings. PCPs should recognize that prehos
-
pital providers may need additional consultation or support, especially 
when managing children with uncommon medical conditions. PCPs 
can support maintenance of pediatric knowledge by EMS providers by 
serving as or working closely with an identified pediatric emergency 
care coordinator (PECC) within the EMS agency to fully integrate 
the needs of children into every aspect of system- based care: policies, 
protocols, quality improvement, patient safety, family- centered care, 
staff competencies, and equipment and supplies. Although children 
represent a minority population in the prehospital setting, the joint 
policy statement, 
Pediatric Readiness in Emergency Medical Services 
Systems,
 provides a comprehensive overview of how EMS systems can 
address the needs of children throughout all aspects of care. The iden
-
tification of a PECC and physical demonstration of pediatric- specific 
skills represent two of the reference standards that the federal EMSC 
program has adopted as performance measures for state- level opera
-
tional readiness to care for children in an EMS system.
First responders may be law enforcement officers or firefighters, who 
are dispatched to provide emergency medical assistance, or bystanders. 
Public safety personnel have a minimum of 40 hours of training in first 
aid and CPR. Their role is to provide rapid response and stabilization 
pending the arrival of more highly trained personnel. In some smaller 
communities, this may be the only prehospital emergency medical 
response available.
In the United States the bulk of emergency medical response is pro
-
vided	by	EMTs,	who	may	be	volunteers	or	paid	professionals.	Basic	
EMTs	may	staff	an	ambulance	after	undergoing	a	training	program	of	
approximately 100 hours. They are licensed to provide BLS services 
but may receive further training in some jurisdictions to expand their 
scope of practice to include intravenous catheter placement and fluid 
administration, management of airway adjuncts, and use of an auto
-
mated external defibrillator (AED).
Paramedics
,	or	EMT-	Ps,	represent	the	highest	level	of	EMT	
response, with medical training and supervised field experience of at 
least 1,000 hours. Paramedic skills include advanced airway manage
-
ment, including endotracheal intubation; placement of peripheral vas
-
cular or intraosseous lines; intravenous administration of drugs and 
blood products; administration of nebulized aerosols; needle and fin
-
ger thoracostomy; and cardioversion, cardiac pacing, and manual defi
-
brillation. These professionals provide ALS services, functioning out 
of an ambulance equipped as a mobile intensive care unit (ICU). The 
joint position statement 
Recommended Essential Equipment for Basic 
Life Support and Advanced Life Support Ground Ambulances 2020
 pub
-
lished by the AAP, ACEP, American College of Surgeons Committee on 
Trauma,	EMSC	Innovation	and	Improvement	Center,	ENA,	National	
Association of EMS Physicians, and National Association of EMS Offi
-
cials outlines national standards for essential equipment, medications, 
and supplies necessary to provide BLS and ALS care across the age 
spectrum.
Both	basic	EMTs	and	paramedics	function	under	the	delegated	
licensing authority of a supervisory EMS medical director. This physi
-
cian oversight of prehospital practice is broadly characterized under 
the umbrella term 
medical control.
 
Direct
, or 
online
, 
medical control
 
refers to medical direction either at the scene or in real time via voice 
or video transmission. 
Indirect
, or 
offline
, 
medical control
 refers to 
the administration of medical direction before and after the provision 
of care (i.e., clinical protocols). Offline activities, such as provider edu
-
cation and training, protocol development, and medical leadership of 
quality assurance/quality improvement programs, represent areas in 
need of greater pediatric input. Whether in the presence or absence of 
a PECC, a pediatric advisory committee may provide additional pedi
-
atric knowledge and expertise. Evaluation and tracking of pediatric 
performance is critical to ensuring high- quality care for children in a 
community. The National EMS Information System (NEMSIS) serves 
as a registry for standardized EMS data collection. EMS agency par
-
ticipation in NEMSIS- compliant data submission is one of the federal 
EMSC performance measures. The National EMS Quality Alliance 
(NEMQA) and the National EMS Model Clinical Guidelines comple
-
ment the NEMSIS program by providing evidence- derived pediatric 
quality measures for adoption in any EMS agency. As a measure of the 
degree to which EMSC permanence is being established in state EMS 
systems, the federal EMSC program has required demonstration of 
the presence of an EMSC advisory committee at the state level. These 
advisory bodies are well positioned to support EMS agencies in their 
pediatric readiness and provide a forum for the active engagement of 
pediatric care experts at a system level.
 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77
 u 
Emergency Medical  Services for Children 
537
Destination Determination
The destination to which a pediatric patient is transported may be 
defined by parental preference, provider preference, or jurisdictional 
protocol, which is typically predicated on field assessment and, in the 
case of trauma, mechanism of injury. The 2021 National Guidelines 
for	the	Field	Triage	of	Injured	Patients	relies	on	injury	patterns,	physi
-
ologic criteria, mechanism of injury, and other special considerations 
(e.g., suspicion for child maltreatment). Based on these criteria, EMS 
providers determine the optimal trauma center destination in the set
-
ting of injury. In communities served by an organized trauma system 
that incorporates pediatric designation based on objectively verified 
hospital capabilities (i.e., pediatric readiness), seriously injured chil
-
dren may be triaged by protocol to the highest- level pediatric- capable 
trauma center reachable within a reasonable amount of time. Other 
communities have established state or regional emergency care systems 
that use pediatric readiness criteria to recognize EDs appropriate for 
pediatric patients. A high level of pediatric readiness in both medical 
and trauma centers is linked to decreased mortality in critically ill and 
injured children. The mantra is to deliver the child to the 
right care in 
the right time,
 even if it requires bypassing closer hospitals.
Regionalization
 in the context of EMS is defined as a geographi
-
cally organized system of services that ensures access to care at a level 
appropriate to patient needs while maintaining efficient use of avail
-
able resources. This system concept is especially germane in the care 
of children, given the relative scarcity of facilities and their associated 
providers that are capable of managing the full range and scope of 
pediatric conditions (
Fig. 77.2
). Regionalized systems of care coordi
-
nated with emergency medical dispatch, field triage, and EMS trans
-
port have demonstrated efficacy in improving outcomes for pediatric 
medical and trauma patients. The existence of statewide or regional 
standardized systems that formally recognize hospitals able to stabi
-
lize and/or manage pediatric medical and traumatic emergencies is a 
federal EMSC performance measure against which operational capac
-
ity to provide optimal pediatric emergency care in the United States is 
currently being evaluated. Over 15 states now offer pediatric medical 
facility recognition programs. For the majority, hospital participation 
in these programs is voluntary. EMSC state partnership programs in 
the respective jurisdiction can provide further guidance on the appli
-
cation process and requirements for participation. Similarly, several 
state trauma systems now integrate elements of pediatric readiness into 
trauma center designation. Moreover, beginning in 2023, the Ameri
-
can	College	of	Surgeons	(ACS)	Committee	on	Trauma	requires	all	
ACS- verified trauma centers to adhere to specific pediatric readiness 
criteria.
In communities that do not have a hospital with the equipment 
and personnel resources to provide definitive pediatric inpatient care, 
interfacility transport
 of a child to a regional pediatric center should 
be undertaken after initial stabilization (see 
Chapter 77.1
). In the end, 
all emergency care facilities must stand ready to provide care to ill and 
injured children of all ages.
 
THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
The ability of EDs to respond to critically ill and injured children 
depends on all aspects of pediatric readiness: administrative over
-
sight, staff competencies, pediatric- specific policies and procedures, 
patient and medication safety, quality improvement, and equipment 
and	supplies.	Training,	awareness,	and	experience	of	the	staff	as	well	
as access to support services, pediatricians, and medical and surgi
-
cal subspecialists also play a key role. The majority of children who 
require emergency care are evaluated in community EDs. Emergency 
care staff, including physicians, nurses, and advanced practice provid
-
ers, may have variable degrees of pediatric training and experience. 
Although children account for approximately 25% of all ED visits, only 
a fraction of these encounters represents true emergencies. Because 
the volume of critical pediatric cases is low, emergency physicians and 
nurses working in lower- volume EDs often have limited opportunity 
to reinforce and sustain their knowledge and skills in the assessment 
and stabilization of severely ill or injured children. Indeed, nearly 70% 
of U.S. EDs provide care for <15 children per day. General pediatri
-
cians from the community or pediatric hospitalists may be consulted 
when a seriously ill or injured child presents to the ED, and they should 
have a structured approach to the initial evaluation and treatment of 
an unstable child of any age, regardless of the underlying diagnosis. 
Telemedicine	and	e-	health	may	serve	as	a	mechanism	to	provide	better	
connectivity between patients, primary care, EDs, and tertiary/quater
-
nary institutions. 
Early recognition of life- threatening abnormalities in 
oxygenation, ventilation, perfusion, and central nervous system function 
and rapid intervention to correct those abnormalities are key to successful 
resuscitation and stabilization of the pediatric patient.
The 
National Pediatric Readiness Project (NPRP)
 is a national 
quality improvement initiative started by the federal EMSC program, 
AAP, ACEP, and ENA to ensure high- quality emergency care for all 
children. The effort began in 2013 with a national assessment of pedi
-
atric readiness in U.S. EDs (as measured by compliance with published 
guidelines). Initial results demonstrated a high level of engagement 
in pediatric readiness but notable gaps in the ability of U.S. EDs to 
meet the needs of children: 48% of EDs had a physician PECC; 59% 
of EDs had a nurse PECC; 46% of EDs included pediatric- specific 
needs in quality improvement efforts; and 47% had a disaster plan 
that addressed the needs of children. Higher readiness levels are seen 
in larger- volume EDs and in EDs with physician and nurse PECCs 
and/or quality improvement plans that included children. Since then, 
numerous efforts, including national quality improvement collabora
-
tives, have targeted key areas of readiness. A second NPRP assess
-
ment was completed in 2021, and national efforts continue to promote 
widespread adoption of pediatric readiness within U.S. EDs. In 2019, 
the National Prehospital Pediatric Readiness Project launched with 
similar efforts focused on ensuring high- quality prehospital emer
-
gency care for children. 
Table	77.2
 lists essential policies, proce
-
dures, and protocols specifically addressing the needs of children in 
the ED. ED staff and other stakeholders can access pediatric readi
-
ness checklists and toolkits and identify opportunities to participate 
in pediatric readiness efforts on the website of the EMSC Innovation 
and Improvement Center, 
https://emscimprovement.center/
. Given 
the link between pediatric readiness and increased survival for criti
-
cally ill and injured children, baseline readiness standards must be met 
by all EDs and EMS agencies to ensure that children receive the best 
emergency care possible.
The way the family supports the child during a crisis, and conse
-
quently how the family is supported by the local EMS agency and 
in the ED when caring for the child, are critical to patient recovery, 
Communityhospital/stroke centerCommunity
hospitalCommunity
hospitalCounty ACounty BUrgent care
centerSceneTreat and
releaseChildren’s hospital/tertiary hospital/
Trauma 1Primary transportInterfacility transport
Fig. 77.2
 Transport options within a coordinated, regionalized emer
-
gency medical services system model. The objective is to ensure access 
to definitive care at a level appropriate to meet patient needs. 
Solid ar
-
rows,
 Primary transport; 
dashed arrows
, interfacility transport. 
(
Adapted 
from Institute of Medicine, Committee on the Future of Emergency 
Care in the U.S. Health System. 
Hospital- Based Emergency Care: At 
the Breaking Point.
 Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2006.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

538 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
family satisfaction, and mitigation of behavioral and mental health 
impact. Commitment to patient-  and family- centered care in the ED 
ensures that the patient and family experience guides the practice of 
culturally sensitive care and promotes patient dignity, comfort, and 
autonomy. In both the ED and EMS settings, particular issues, such 
as family presence, deserve specific attention. Surveys of parents have 
indicated that most want to be with their child during invasive pro
-
cedures and even during resuscitation. Allowing their presence has 
been shown to reduce parental and patient anxiety and does not inter
-
fere with procedure performance. Patient-  and family- centered care 
practices are also strongly associated with improved care quality and 
patient safety.
Disaster Preparedness
Throughout a public health emergency or catastrophic event, natural 
or human- made, several unique factors place children at dispropor
-
tionate, increased risk. Combined with other factors, global climate 
change has promoted increased frequency and severity of weather- 
related disasters. During an average workday, an estimated 69 million 
U.S. children are separated from their families in schools and childcare 
centers, where mass casualty events can easily occur. This separation 
adds the further challenge of safe and timely reunification of children 
with family during or after an incident. Furthermore, in the event of a 
biologic, chemical, or radio- nuclear attack, unique anatomic, develop
-
mental, and physiologic features make children especially vulnerable to 
absorption, ingestion, or inhalation of toxic agents and related morbid
-
ity and mortality (see 
Chapter 763
).
Pediatric planning considerations include training of first respond
-
ers and other care providers, patient triage, decontamination, surge 
capacity and capabilities, medical countermeasures (medications, 
vaccines, equipment, supplies), evacuation, transport, sheltering, and 
family reunification. The community plays a significant role in pre
-
paredness and is inclusive of schools, school nurses, faith- based orga
-
nizations, and other community entities.
All levels of the healthcare system must be prepared for disaster- 
driven surges in patient care needs. Surge capacity refers to the ability 
to	evaluate	and	care	for	a	markedly	increased	volume	of	patients—one	
that challenges or exceeds normal variations in operating capacity. 
Surge capability refers to the ability to provide specialized medical ser
-
vices for unique patient populations, such as children, that may not 
be routinely available under normal operating conditions. Surges may 
require alternative care processes and additional resources to meet 
the demand for services. Critical surges may require consideration of 
contingency plans that typically require activation of alternative care 
standards. Surges that exceed the additional capacity of contingency 
plans may require implementation of crisis care standards as a means 
to increase capacity beyond levels that exceed normal daily operations. 
During a public health emergency, surge requirements may extend 
beyond direct patient care to include tasks such as laboratory screen
-
ing or epidemiologic investigations. All levels of the healthcare system 
may be challenged to increase their capabilities, providing medical 
services for patient populations, such as children, that may not be rou
-
tinely available. As an example, the community hospital that routinely 
transfers higher- acuity ill or injured children or children with medical 
Table 77.2 
 
  Guidelines for Pediatric- Specific Policies, Procedures, and Protocols for the Emergency Department (ED)
Illness and injury triage
Pediatric patient assessment and reassessment
Documentation of pediatric vital signs, abnormal vital signs, and 
 
actions to be taken for abnormal vital signs
Identification and notification of the responsible provider of 
 
abnormal vital signs (age or weight based)
Immunization assessment and management of the underimmunized 
patient
Sedation and analgesia for procedures, including medical imaging
Consent (including situations in which a parent is not immediately 
available)
Social and mental health issues
Physical or chemical restraint of patients
Child maltreatment (physical and sexual abuse, sexual assault, and 
neglect) mandated reporting criteria, requirements, and processes
Death of the child in the ED
Do- not- resuscitate orders
Lack of a medical home
Children with special healthcare needs
Family- centered care, including:
 1.  Involving families in patient care decision- making and in 
 
medication safety processes
 2.  Family and guardian presence during all aspects of emergency 
care, including resuscitation
 3.  Education of the patient, family, and regular caregivers
 4.  Discharge planning and instruction
 5.  Bereavement counseling
Communication with patient’s medical home or primary healthcare 
provider
Telehealth and telecommunications
Medical imaging policies that address age-  or weight- appropriate 
dosing for children receiving studies that impart ionizing radiation, 
consistent with ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable) principles
All- hazard disaster preparedness plan that addresses the following 
pediatric issues:
 1.  Availability of medications, vaccines, equipment, and 
appropriately trained providers for children in disasters
 2.  Pediatric surge capacity for both injured and noninjured 
 
children
 3.  Decontamination, isolation, and quarantine of families and 
children of all ages
 4.  Minimization of parent- child separation and includes 
system tracking of pediatric patients, allowing for the timely 
reunification of separated children with their families
 5.  Access to specific medical and mental health therapies, as well 
as social services, for children in the event of a disaster
 6.  Disaster drills, which should include a pediatric mass casualty 
incident at least every 2 years
 7.  Care of children with special healthcare needs
 8.  A plan that includes evacuation of pediatric units and pediatric 
critical care and specialty units
Evidence- based clinical pathways, order sets, or decision support 
tools
Written interfacility transfer procedure and agreements that include 
the following components:
 1.  Defined process for initiation of transfer, including the roles 
and responsibilities of the referring facility and referral center 
(including responsibilities for requesting transfer, method of 
transport, and communication)
 2.  Transport plan to deliver children safely (including the use of 
child passenger restraint devices) and in a timely manner to 
the appropriate facility capable of providing definitive care
 3.  Process for selecting the appropriate care facility for pediatric 
specialty services not available at the hospital
 4.  Process for selecting the appropriately staffed transport 
service to match the patient’s acuity level (i.e., level of care 
required and equipment needed for transport) and appropriate 
for children with special healthcare needs
 5.  Process for patient transfer (including obtaining informed 
consent)
 6.  Plan for transfer of critical patient information (i.e., medical 
record, imaging, copy of signed transport consent), as well as 
personal belongings and provision of directions and referral 
institution information to family
 7.  Process for return transfer of the pediatric patient to the 
 
referring facility as appropriate
 8.  Integration with telehealth/telecommunications processes and 
mobile integrated health/community paramedicine as appropriate
Adapted from Remick K, Gausche- Hill M, Joseph MM, Brown K, Snow SK, Wright JL; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Pediatric Emergency Medicine and Section 
on Surgery; American College of Emergency Physicians Pediatric Emergency Medicine Committee; Emergency Nurses Association Pediatric Committee. Pediatric readiness in the 
emergency department. 
Pediatrics
. 2018;142(5):e20182459.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77
 u 
Emergency Medical  Services for Children 
539
complexity to a pediatric tertiary center may be unable to do so during 
a disaster. Mechanisms for remote consultation and support of pedi
-
atric care, leveraging community pediatricians and tertiary pediatric 
subspecialists via telemedicine, should be considered.
Beyond acute medical treatment needs, pediatric planning must also 
consider the typically broad mental and behavioral health impact disas
-
ters have on children and families. Mental and behavioral health con
-
cerns commonly represent the largest impact of disasters on children 
and adolescents. Pediatric plans must also be in place for locations where 
children congregate, such as schools and childcare; these plans must be 
aligned with local jurisdiction planning and communicated to families.
Community practice and healthcare system readiness and resiliency 
begin with 
personal and family readiness planning
 engaged by health
-
care providers and support staff; these efforts should also include atten
-
tion to provider wellness.
The AAP’s Children and Disasters website
*
 (
https://www.aap.org/
en/community/aap- councils/council- on- disaster- preparedness- and- 
recovery- codpr/
) contains toolkits, checklists, and other resources 
pertinent to pediatric readiness within the community, schools, the 
medical home, and hospitals; educational materials are also available 
for families. Reliable information and excellent disaster readiness 
resources are also located on the websites of the EMSC Innovation and 
Improvement Center and U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser
-
vices (HHS) and Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response 
(ASPR) Eastern Great Lakes Pediatric Disaster Center of Excellence 
 
* 
https://www.aap.org/en- us/advocacy- and- policy/aap- health- initiatives/Children- and- 
Disasters/Pages/default.aspx
.
(
https://emscimprovement.center
), U.S. Centers for Disease Con
-
trol and Prevention (
https://emergency.cdc.gov
), U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services (
https://www.phe.gov/preparedness/Page
s/default.aspx
),	U.S.	HHS	ASPR	Technical	Resources,	Assistance	Cen
-
ter,	and	Information	Exchange	(TRACIE)	(
https://asprtracie.hhs.gov/
), 
U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (
https://www.fema.
gov
), HHS ASPR Western Regional Alliance for Pediatric Emergency 
Management (WRAPEM) (
https://www.wrap-em.org/index.php/
resources-edocman-public
), and HHS HRS Pediatric Network (PPN) 
(
https://pedspandemicnetwork.org/
).
 
Triage in Disaster Pediatric Medical Care
Mass causality events (hurricanes, bombings, gas leaks, bus or plane 
crashes, earthquakes, mass shootings, fires, others) require 
scene- based
 
assessment, assignment, and tagging (
Figs. 77.3 and 77.4
). Assessment 
must be rapid (
∼
30 seconds) and includes breathing, circulation, and 
mental status. These parameters are incorporated in the 
START
 (simple 
triage and rapid treatment) triage tool for adolescent and adults and the 
Jump START
 assessment for 0-  to 14- year- old children. The combined 
algorithm is noted in 
Figure 77.3
.	The	“jump”	in	Jump	START	relates	to	
one difference between pediatric and adult approaches wherein children 
are given a rescue breath if they remain apneic with a pulse after posi
-
tioning the airway (see 
Fig. 77.3
).	Triage	categories	are	color	coded	(see	
Fig. 77.4
) at the site of the disaster based on risk. 
Red
 – immediate life- 
threatening injury; 
Yellow
 – potentially stable for a short period; 
Green
 – 
minor injury, walking wounded; 
Black
 – dead or not expected to survive.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Able towalk?YesYesNoNoBreathing?RespiratoryratePerfusionMental statusMinorPosition upper airwayAPNEICBreathingPEDIAdult+ PulseNo pulseAPNEIC5 rescue breaths     Expectant/DeceasedNeurological assessmentAVPUAlertResponds toverbal stimuliResponds topainful stimuliUnresponsive tonoxious stimuliBreathingImmediateImmediateImmediateSecondary triage**Using the JS algorithm,
evaluate first all children who
did not walk under their ownpower.ImmediateImmediateDelayed>30 adultDoes not obey commandsObeys commands (Adult)“P” (inappropriate; e.g, posturing) or “U”
“A”, “V” or “P” (Appropriate) (Pediatric)
(Pediatric)(Adult)YesCR> 2sec (Adult)No palpable pulse (PEDI)<15 or >45 PEDI<30 adult15–45 PEDI
Fig. 77.3
 Combined START/Jump START triage algorithm.
 (
Copyright 2002, Lou Romig, MD.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

540 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
77.1
  Interfacility Transport of the Seriously 
Ill or Injured Pediatric Patient
Corina Noje, Mary Beth Howard, and Bruce L. Klein
*
Patients often seek treatment at facilities that lack sufficient expertise to 
treat their conditions, necessitating transfer to more appropriate spe
-
cialty centers. This is especially pronounced in pediatrics. Emergency 
medical services (EMS) providers or parents usually take children to 
local emergency departments (EDs) first, where their conditions and 
physiologic stabilities are assessed. Although bringing a child directly 
to the local ED may be proper logistically, community- based local EDs 
can be less than ideal for pediatric emergencies. Children have been 
reported to account for about 20% of all ED visits, but not all EDs have 
the necessary supplies for pediatric emergencies. Also, general EDs are 
less likely to have pediatric expertise or policies in place for the care of 
children. Outcomes for critically ill children treated in pediatric inten
-
sive care units (PICUs) are better than for those treated in adult ICUs. 
When pediatric critical care is required, transport to a regional PICU is 
indicated. In addition, often the type of subspecialty care needed (e.g., 
pediatric orthopedics) is available only at the pediatric center.
Pediatric transport medicine
 consists of the interfacility transfer of 
infants, children, and adolescents from community facilities to pedi
-
atric	centers	that	can	provide	the	needed	level	of	expertise.	Transport	
is performed by professionals proficient in pediatric transport using 
age- equipped ground, rotorcraft, or fixed- wing ambulances. Pediat
-
ric transport medicine is a multidisciplinary field comprising pediat
-
ric critical care and pediatric emergency medicine (PEM) physicians 
(and, sometimes for newborn infants, neonatologists); nurses, respira
-
tory therapists, and paramedics with advanced training for pediatric 
transport; and communications specialists. The goal is to deliver qual
-
ity pediatric care to the region’s children, while optimizing the use of 
regional resources. For the individual child, the aim is to stabilize and, 
when	appropriate,	begin	treating	as	soon	as	possible—that	is,	at	the	
local ED and during transport, well before arrival at the referral center.
Models for pediatric transport services vary depending on the needs 
and available resources in a geographic region, but all should have cer
-
tain basic components: a network of community hospitals and regional 
pediatric centers; an established communications and dispatch system 
that easily facilitates transfer to the pediatric center; ground and/or air 
ambulances; medical and nursing leadership from pediatric critical 
care or PEM (or neonatology); experienced pediatric 
medical control 
physicians (MCPs)
; a multidisciplinary team of pediatric transport 
professionals specially trained and equipped to provide the appropriate 
level of care required during transport; operational and clinical policies 
* Adapted initially from Dr. Lorry R. Frankel’s chapter in the 18th edition of this book. We 
also want to thank Dr. Beth Edgerton, who co- authored a prior version of this chapter.
and procedures that guarantee safe, state- of- the- art, and timely pediat
-
ric critical care transport; and a database for quality and performance 
assessment.
COMMUNICATIONS AND DISPATCH CENTER
Communications are one of the most vital components of a regional 
transport	system.	Treating	a	critically	ill	or	injured	child	is	generally	an	
uncommon event for most community physicians. Therefore they need 
to know 
whom, how,
 and 
when
 to call for assistance in the stabilization 
and transfer of a pediatric patient. The communications and dispatch 
center provides a single telephone number for such calls.
The communications and dispatch center coordinates communica
-
tions among the outlying facility, receiving unit, MCP, transport team, 
and other consultants. This center may be part of a hospital unit (e.g., 
ED, PICU), self- contained in a single institution (e.g., emergency com
-
munications and information center), or based off- site as a freestand
-
ing center coordinating communications and dispatch for multiple 
transport programs.
Staffing varies depending on the type of center. On- duty nurses 
or physicians may receive calls at unit- based models with low vol
-
umes. In contrast, dedicated communications specialists usually staff 
self- contained or freestanding centers, which tend to be busier. The 
communications specialist has numerous responsibilities, including 
answering the referring physician’s call promptly; documenting essen
-
tial patient demographic information; arranging for immediate consul
-
tation with the MCP; dispatching the transport team to the referring 
facility expeditiously; updating the referring facility with any changes 
in the arrival time; and coordinating medical control and other neces
-
sary transport- related calls. The transport team must be able to contact 
the receiving and referring facilities immediately, when necessary. Fur
-
thermore, with advances in technology and wireless communication 
systems, 
telemedicine
—either	
interactive
 (synchronous) or 
store and 
forward
	(asynchronous)—is	being	used	during	pediatric	transport,	
and certain programs have incorporated it into their routine transport 
operations.
 
MEDICAL CONTROL PHYSICIAN
The MCP is involved in the clinical care and safe transport of the 
patient from the time of referral through arrival at the receiving hospi
-
tal unit. The MCP’s oversight increases once the transport team arrives 
at the referring facility. The MCP should have expertise in pediatric 
critical care or PEM (or sometimes neonatology). Besides having the 
knowledge required to stabilize a critically ill or injured child, the MCP 
must be familiar with the transport environment; the transport team 
members’ resources and capabilities; the program’s policies and pro
-
cedures; and the region’s geography, medical resources, and regula
-
tions regarding interhospital transport. The MCP must possess good 
interpersonal and communication skills and must be able to maintain 
Fig. 77.4
 Triage categories. (
From US Department of Health and Human Services: https://chemm.hhs.gov/startpediatric.htm.
)
Triage categories
Black triage tag color
Red triage tag colorImmediate
DelayedMinor• Victim unlikely to survive given severity  of injuries, level of available care, or both
• Palliative care and pain relief should  be provided
Yellow triage tag color• Victim can be helped by immediat
e
  intervention and transport• Requires medical attention withi
n
  minutes for survival (up to 60
)
• Includes compromises to patient’s  Airway, Breathing, Circulation
• Victim’s transport can be delayed• Includes serious and potentially  life-threatening injuries, but status not  expected to deteriorate significantly
  over several hoursGreen triage tag color• Victim with relatively minor injuries
• Status unlikely to deteriorate over days
• May be able to assist in own care:
  “Walking wounded”Expectant
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77
 u 
Emergency Medical  Services for Children 
541
collegiality with the referring hospital’s staff during a potentially dif
-
ficult and stressful situation.
Once a transport call is received, the MCP must be immediately 
available to confer with the referring physician. Although the MCP may 
have other responsibilities, these transport responsibilities take priority 
in order to avoid undue delays when transferring a critically ill child. 
Often the MCP recommends further testing or therapeutic interven
-
tions that can be delivered by the referring hospital before the transport 
team arrives. The MCP may seek additional guidance from other spe
-
cialists, as necessary. Because the child’s condition may change rapidly, 
the MCP must remain ready to give additional advice. All conversa
-
tions and recommendations regarding the care of the patient should be 
documented. Some centers record these conversations.
After	discussion	with	the	referring	physician—and	when	warranted,	
with	the	transport	staff—the	MCP	determines	the	best	team	composi
-
tion and vehicle for transport. The MCP usually does not accompany 
the team but remains available to supervise care. With advances in 
video conferencing capabilities, there has been increased use of tele
-
medicine in the pediatric transport medical direction process. For 
some acutely ill patients or those requiring visual diagnoses, telemedi
-
cine has been reported to improve disposition at the receiving hospital, 
potentially leading to improved clinical outcomes.
 
TRANSPORT TEAM
Transport	team	composition	varies	greatly	among	programs—and	
sometimes within an individual program. The team’s composition is 
based on a variety of factors, including the child’s age; the severity of 
the illness or injury; the distance to the referring facility; the transport 
vehicle used; the team members’ advanced practice scope and abili
-
ties; the referrer’s insistence that a physician be present; the program’s 
historical professional makeup; and the region’s staffing regulations. 
The pediatric transport workforce may include physicians, advanced 
practice providers, nurses, respiratory therapists, and paramedics who 
have expertise in pediatric critical care, PEM, or neonatology (in some 
cases), as well as advanced education and training in those cognitive 
and procedural areas important for pediatric critical care transport. 
Physician	trainees—usually	fellows	and,	less	often,	residents—may	also	
participate in transport in some capacity. There is a lower incidence 
of transport- related morbidity for critically ill and injured children 
transported by pediatric specialty teams than for those transported by 
generalist teams. Nevertheless, in- transit critical events occur in 
∼
10% 
of pediatric critical care transports.
Various scoring systems that can help guide team composition and/
or mode of transport have been developed to aid in transport planning. 
A team member’s training, experience, and skill in treating critically ill 
patients are more important considerations than that team member’s 
professional	degree.	Team	members	must	understand	basic	pediatric	
pathophysiology and collectively must be able to assess and monitor 
a critically ill or injured child; manage the airway and provide respi
-
ratory support; obtain vascular access; perform point- of- care testing; 
and administer fluids and medications (including infusions) typically 
used in pediatric critical care transport. They must be familiar with the 
physiologic alterations and practical difficulties of the transport envi
-
ronment and, importantly, must be comfortable working in an out- of- 
hospital setting. Physicians are less often deployed on transport teams 
in part because of the advanced training that other healthcare profes
-
sionals on the transport team receive.
The transport team should have a designated team leader who, in 
addition to the team leader’s many other responsibilities, interacts 
with the MCP during the transport. Once the team arrives at the refer
-
ring facility, the team should reassess the child’s condition, review all 
the pertinent diagnostic studies and therapies, and discuss the situa
-
tion with the referring staff and parents. If the patient’s condition has 
changed significantly, the team leader may need to contact the MCP for 
additional advice. Otherwise, the team leader should generally notify 
the MCP before starting to bring the child to the receiving facility. Any 
care delivered by the team during transport should be documented, 
and	copies	of	all	medical	records—including	laboratory	data,	radio
-
graphs,	and	scans—should	accompany	the	child	to	the	pediatric	center.	
The receiving unit must be updated before arrival so it can finalize 
preparations for the patient.
 
GROUND VS AIR AMBULANCE
Transport	vehicle	options	include	ground,	rotorcraft,	and	fixed-	wing	
ambulances. Vehicle selection depends on the child’s emergency needs, 
transport team’s capabilities, any out- of- ordinary staffing or equipment 
requirements (e.g., extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, inhaled 
nitric oxide, heliox), referring facility’s abilities, distance, terrain, traffic 
patterns, ground or air ambulance availability, helicopter landing pad 
or airport access, weather conditions, and expense.
The transport vehicle must be equipped with electrical power, oxy
-
gen, and suction and must have sufficient space for the equipment and 
supplies	that	the	team	brings	along—stretcher	or	isolette,	monitor,	
ventilator, oxygen tank(s), medication pack(s), infusion pumps, and 
more. Compared with helicopters, ambulances typically are more spa
-
cious and able to carry more weight, so they can accommodate larger 
teams and more equipment. Another advantage of ground ambulance 
transport is the ability to stop en route if the patient’s condition dete
-
riorates; this may facilitate the performance of certain interventions or 
procedures, such as intubation.
An airplane may be able to fly to an area when distance (>150 miles), 
altitude, or weather precludes helicopter use. However, the use of an 
airplane necessitates several ambulance transfers, with their attendant 
delays and additional risks. There also are delays when the plane must 
fly from a remote base to the program’s jurisdiction.
 
TRANSPORT PHYSIOLOGY
When possible, the transport team tries to provide the same care dur
-
ing transport as the patient would receive in the specialty center. This 
can be difficult, however, because of limitations in personnel, equip
-
ment, and space, as well as other environmental challenges.
The team and child are subjected to variable intensities of back
-
ground noise and vibration while traveling in the vehicle cabin. 
Noise
 
can impair the team’s ability to auscultate breath sounds and heart 
sounds	or	accurately	measure	the	blood	pressure	manually—another	
reason for monitoring vital signs mechanically and relying on other 
assessment modalities, such as the level of mentation, skin color, and 
capillary refill. For rotor transports in particular, the crew and patient 
should wear helmets or headphones (or another wearable noise atten
-
uator) to mitigate noise. 
Motion
 and 
vibration
 are additional trans
-
port hazards and can lead to increased metabolic rate, shortness of 
breath, and fatigue in the patient, as well as motion sickness in the 
patient and staff.
On fixed- wing or certain rotary- wing transports, the patient may 
suffer adverse physiologic effects from 
altitude
. With increasing 
altitude, the barometric (atmospheric) pressure decreases, and gas 
expands to occupy a greater volume due to the decreased pressure 
exerted on it. Therefore, as barometric pressure drops with altitude, 
the partial pressures of inspired oxygen (Pi
o
2
) and, consequently, arte
-
rial oxygen (Pa
o
2
) decrease, as does the arterial oxygen- hemoglobin 
saturation (Sp
o
2
).	For	example,	at	8,000	feet—an	elevation	at	which	
unpressurized airplanes may fly, as well as the effective cabin altitude 
for	many	pressurized	airplanes	flying	at	35,000-	40,000	feet—the	baro
-
metric pressure, Pi
o
2
, Pa
o
2
, and Sp
o
2
 fall to 565 mm Hg, 118 mm Hg, 
61 mm Hg, and 93%, respectively. In comparison, the barometric pres
-
sure, Pi
o
2
, Pa
o
2
, and Sp
o
2
 are 760 mm Hg, 159 mm Hg, 95 mm Hg, 
and 100% at sea level. Although healthy individuals usually tolerate 
these changes well, patients with respiratory insufficiency, pulmonary 
hypertension, significant blood loss, or shock may decompensate and 
should receive supplemental oxygen and/or have the cabin pressurized 
at sea level.
Gases expand up to 10% at the few thousand feet where helicopters 
typically fly, and approximately 30–40% at 8,000 feet. Gases within the 
body itself also expand as the altitude increases. The degree of gas expan
-
sion must be considered during transport via air of any patient with 
pneumocephalus, pneumothorax, bowel obstruction, or another condi
-
tion involving entrapped gas. Before transport, a pneumothorax should 
generally be decompressed and a nasogastric tube inserted for ileus.
 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

542 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
SAFETY
Safety is of paramount importance and mandates constant vigilance by 
everyone involved. Accident rates for pediatric air and ground trans
-
port have been estimated at approximately 1 in 1,000 transports. The 
team should routinely attend pilot briefs and perform safety inspections 
of the vehicles and equipment, aided by checklists. When in doubt, the 
MCP should solicit input from the staff about whether to transport via 
air or ground ambulance or to employ lights and sirens, decisions that 
cannot be taken lightly. The pilot’s or driver’s judgment as to the safety 
of proceeding during inclement weather or with a mechanical problem 
must not be overruled.
Organizations such as the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
and	the	National	Transportation	Safety	Board	(NTSB)	play	a	role	in	
ensuring safe interfacility transport. The 
Commission on Accredi
-
tation of Medical Transport Systems (CAMTS)
 is an independent, 
peer- review organization established in 1990 in response to the num
-
ber	of	air	medical	accidents	in	the	1980s.	CAMTS,	through	voluntary	
participation, audits and accredits fixed- wing, rotary- wing, and ground 
interfacility medical transport services.
 
FAMILY- CENTERED CARE
Family- centered care represents a philosophy that respects the impor
-
tant role that family members play in a child’s care. It recognizes family 
members and healthcare providers as partners in caring for the child. 
Family presence during transport is beneficial because it provides sup
-
port to both children and parents in stressful situations and assists 
healthcare providers in delivering care to patients with complex and 
chronic medical problems.
As care is transitioned from the referring hospital, it is the transport 
team’s responsibility to maintain culturally sensitive, family- centered 
care. The team meets with family members to explain the transport 
process, help obtain consent, and discuss anticipated management. 
When possible, the transport team should attempt to accommodate a 
family member’s presence onboard. However, the family member and 
child may need to be separated when the child is critically ill and rapid 
transport is essential, or in case of space or weight limitations in the air 
or ground ambulance. In these situations, it is important that family 
members have a clear understanding of how the child will be cared for 
during the separation.
 
REFERRING HOSPITAL RESPONSIBILITIES
Transfer	of	a	child	to	another	facility	requires	written	documentation	
by the referring physician of the need and reasons for transfer, includ
-
ing a statement that the risks and benefits, as well as any alternatives, 
have been discussed with the parents. Informed consent should be 
obtained from the parent/legal guardian before transfer.
Federal	law	under	the	Emergency	Medical	Treatment	and	Active	
Labor	Act	(EMTALA),	part	of	the	Consolidated	Omnibus	Budget	
Reconciliation Act (COBRA), imposes specific requirements that a 
patient presenting to an ED be given a medical screening examina
-
tion without regard for ability to pay. If on examination an emer
-
gency medical condition is found, the hospital is required to stabilize 
the patient or to transfer the patient to another facility if unable to 
stabilize the patient (or if requested by the patient in writing after 
being informed of the risks). The primary requirement is that the 
referring physician must certify that the medical risks of transfer 
are outweighed by its potential benefits. The receiving hospital must 
agree to accept the patient if it has the space and staff to provide the 
necessary level of care. The transferring hospital is responsible for 
arranging for the transfer and ensuring that it is performed by quali
-
fied medical personnel with appropriate equipment. The transfer
-
ring hospital must also send copies of the patient’s medical records 
and test results, even those that become available after the transfer 
is complete.
Some referring hospitals have entered into transfer agreements with 
specialty centers to facilitate the smooth and safe transfer of pediatric 
patients. Having prepared forms for all the purposes noted earlier also 
aids in the transfer process.
Each hospital needs to review its facility’s guidelines; if estab
-
lished guidelines do not exist, the Emergency Medical Services for 
Children National Resource Center in partnership with the Emer
-
gency	Nurses	Association	and	the	Society	of	Trauma	Nurses	has	
developed	the	“Interfacility	Transfer	Tool	Kit	for	the	Pediatric	
Patient” (available at: 
https://emscimprovement.center/education- 
and- resources/toolkits/interfacility- transfer- toolbox/
). This tool kit 
includes the essentials for comprehensively and safely transferring 
the pediatric patient to the most appropriate level of care in a timely 
manner.
 
EDUCATIONAL OUTREACH
Besides safe and rapid transport, regional pediatric transport programs 
(and their specialty centers) have an obligation to provide educational 
opportunities to community healthcare providers so that these provid
-
ers can acquire the necessary skills to evaluate and stabilize a critically 
ill or injured child until the transport team arrives. These learning 
activities may include transport case reviews; lectures on pediatric 
acute care topics; resuscitation and related programs such as the Pedi
-
atric Advanced Life Support (PALS) course, Advanced Pediatric Life 
Support (APLS) course, Pediatric Education for Prehospital Profes
-
sionals	(PEPP)	course,	and	S.T.A.B.L.E.	(sugar	and	safe	care,	tempera
-
ture, airway, blood pressure, lab work, emotional support) program; 
and rotations through the specialty center’s pediatric ED and PICU. 
These activities also help cement relationships with the referring facil
-
ity’s staff.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
77.2
  Risk Adjustment and Outcomes 
Measurement of Pediatric Emergency 
Medical Services
Anna K. Weiss
Health services research has demonstrated wide variation in imple
-
mentation of equitable, evidence- based care for pediatric patients in 
U.S. hospitals, a reality that can negatively affect the health of children 
and youth (see 
Chapter 2
). The complexities of delivering high- quality, 
evidence- based care are magnified in the emergency department (ED), 
where patients are often in crisis, patient- physician interactions are 
brief, and the variety and volume of complaints and diagnoses are 
immense. In the context of this frenetic environment, practitioners can 
only assess their local system relative to recognized benchmarks and 
standards of care if there are clear guidelines for measurement of per
-
formance. However, no two places of practice are the same, and a single 
ED may differ significantly from a theoretical “best practice” standard. 
To	reflect	this,	practitioners	seeking	to	make	local	improvements	must	
assess not only raw outcomes (e.g., throughput times, mortality, patient 
satisfaction) but must also adjust for severity of illness, case mix, and 
risk of morbidity.
OUTCOME MEASURES IN EMERGENCY MEDICAL 
SERVICES FOR CHILDREN
To	ensure	delivery	of	equitable,	evidence-	based	care	in	the	ED,	pediat
-
ric emergency medical systems must support the use of national stan
-
dards for emergency care performance measurement. The 
Donabedian 
structure- process- outcome model
 provides a framework for most con
-
temporary quality measurement and improvement activities. In this 
framework, 
structural
 elements provide indirect quality- of- care mea
-
sures related to a physical setting and resources (e.g., available staff, 
equipment, and supplies). 
Process
 indicators provide a measure of the 
quality of care and services by evaluating the method or process by 
which care is delivered, including both technical and interpersonal 
components. 
Outcome
 elements describe valued results related to 
lengthening life, relieving pain, reducing disabilities, and satisfying the 
consumer.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77
 u 
Emergency Medical  Services for Children 
543
A true 
outcome- based
 approach to 
performance improvement
 
describes observable measures such as mortality, risk of organ sys
-
tem failure, and disability. An alternative approach is a 
resource- based
 
outcome measure with a definition that is relative to the level of care 
required. Children who are more ill generally require more resources; 
therefore resource use across groups of patients reflects relative 
sever
-
ity of illness
 within the groups, provided clinicians have a similar 
approach to practice. Examples of resource- based outcomes include 
need for hospital admission (ED disposition), ED length of stay, costs, 
and diagnostic and therapeutic interventions performed in the ED. 
Although this approach provides a measurement of clinical activity, 
when used in a vacuum it does not indicate whether the patient receiv
-
ing the therapeutic interventions or resources actually needed them 
(i.e., data may also reflect physician behavior and/or [lack of] expe
-
rience). Therefore some other assessment is needed that incorporates 
information on 
how sick
 the patient is or their specific diagnosis.
Table	77.3
 provides a list of performance measures for pediatric 
ED care developed by the 
Emergency Medical Services for Chil
-
dren Innovation and Improvement Center
 supported by the Health 
Resources and Services Administration of the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.
 
RISK ADJUSTMENT
The	purpose	of	measuring	outcomes	in	the	ED	is	to	evaluate	
per
-
formance
—offering	EDs	and	other	components	of	the	healthcare	
system the opportunity to make meaningful improvements over 
time using benchmarks within and between units. When making 
comparisons over time, one must ensure that patient- related attri
-
butes (e.g., age, preexisting conditions, severity of illness) have not 
changed; otherwise, one may be looking at changes in demography 
and	case	mix	rather	than	at	true	change	in	performance.	To	ensure	
fair and meaningful measurement across time, 
risk adjustment
 is 
necessary to 
level the playing field
. As an example, illness severity 
typifies the concept of 
risk
—the	higher	the	severity,	the	higher	the	
risk of a given outcome. Without risk adjustment, EDs with sicker 
patients may appear to have poorer outcomes.
Risk Adjustment Tools in the ED
Although	other	risk	adjustment	scoring	systems—such	as	the	PRISM	
score	for	pediatric	critical	care—use	mortality	and	morbidity	as	pri
-
mary outcomes, this approach is not appropriate for the ED setting. 
Across U.S. EDs, pediatric mortality is low, and a patient’s presenting 
physiology may reflect interventions performed in the prehospital set
-
ting. Similarly, eventual morbidity and/or mortality may reflect what 
happens in the PICU or during hospital ward care.
In the ED, the choice of a risk adjustment tool depends on ED- 
specific	outcomes	of	interest.	Two	general	risk	adjustment	tools	have	
been developed specifically for PEM, the second- generation Pediatric 
Risk of Admission (PRISA II) score and the Revised Pediatric Emer
-
gency	Assessment	Tool	(RePEAT).
o“•“?q“?–?““–?hh
PRISA II uses components of acute and chronic medical history as 
well as acute physiology to determine the probability of hospitaliza
-
tion. The outcome measure of interest is 
mandatory hospital admission
 
(admissions using therapies that are best delivered in the inpatient 
 
setting). 
Table	77.4
 lists the patient- related attributes contributing to 
the PRISA II risk adjustment score. Analytic models, including the 
PRISA II score, have good 
calibration
 (how well the probabilities pre
-
dicted from the model correlated with the observed outcomes in the 
population) and 
discrimination
 (the ability to categorize subjects cor
-
rectly into the categories of interest) with respect to mandatory hospital 
admission. Construct validity of the PRISA II score has been demon
-
strated by measuring rates of the secondary outcomes: mandatory 
admission, PICU admission, and mortality. As the probability of hos
-
pital admission rises, the proportion of patients with these increasing 
care requirements also increases. This finding supports the use of the 
PRISA II score as a measure of illness severity. PRISA II has also been 
used to demonstrate racial/ethnic differences in severity- adjusted hos
-
pitalization rates, as well as variation in hospitalization rates between 
teaching and nonteaching hospitals.
 
    
RePEAT	uses	a	limited	set	of	data	collected	at	the	time	of	ED	triage	to	
model severity of illness as reflected by the level of care provided in 
the	ED—for	example,	routine	assessment	(clinical	examination	only	
± nonprescription medicine) vs specific ED care (ED diagnostics and/
or therapeutics) vs hospital admission. In this model, it is assumed 
that patients needing a higher level of care have a higher severity of 
illness. 
Table	77.5
 lists the patient- related attributes contributing to 
able 77.5 
 
  Elements of the RePEAT Score
	•		Age
	•		Chief	complaint
	•		Triage	category
	•		Current	use	of	prescription	medications
	•		Arrival	via	EMS	(ground/air)
	•		Heart	rate	(relative	to	age-	based	norms)
	•		Respiratory	rate	(relative	to	age-	based	norms)
	•		Temperature
NWWN
 
  Stakeholder- Endorsed Performance Measures 
for Pediatric Emergency Care
	•		Measuring	weight	in	kilograms	for	patients	<18	years	of	age
	•		Presence	of	a	method	to	identify	age-based	abnormal	pediatric	
vital signs
	•		Pediatric	equipment	in	the	ED
	•		Presence	of	on-site	pediatric	coordinator(s)
	•		Parent/caregiver	understanding	of	discharge	instructions
	•		Door	to	provider	time
	•		Total	length	of	stay
	•		Reducing	pain	in	children	with	acute	fractures
	•		Children	with	minor	head	trauma	receiving	a	head	CT	scan
	•		Protocol	for	suspected	child	abuse	in	place
	•		Systemic	corticosteroids	in	asthma	patients	with	acute	
 
exacerbation
	•		Evidence-based	guideline	for	bronchiolitis
	•		Reducing	antibiotic	use	in	children	with	viral	illnesses
	•		Return	visits	within	48	hours	resulting	in	admission
	•		Medication	error	rates
ACEP, American College of Emergency Physicians; AAP, American Academy of 
Pediatrics; ENA, Emergency Nurses’ Association; GCS, Glasgow Coma Score; CT, 
computed tomography.
Table 77.4 
 
  Elements of the PRISA II Score
	•		Age
	•		Injury	severity
	•		Temperature
	•		Referral	status	(e.g.,	self-	referral	vs	referral	from	physician’s	office	
or from another ED)
	•		Presence	of:
	•		Abdominal	pain	in	an	adolescent
	•		Immunodeficiency
	•		Indwelling	medical	device
	•		Controller	asthma	medication
	•		Decreased	mental	status
	•		Low	systolic	blood	pressure	(<70	neonates	and	infants;	<83	children;	
<100	adolescents)
	•		High	diastolic	blood	pressure	(>59	neonates	and	infants;	>70	children;	
>90	adolescents)
	•		Low	serum	bicarbonate	value	(<20	mEq/L)
	•		High	potassium	value	(>4.9	mEq/L)
	•		High	blood	urea	nitrogen	value	(>80	mg/dL)
	•		High	white	blood	cell	count	(>20,000/mm
3
)
	•		Oxygen	therapy	other	than	during	inhaled	bronchodilator	treatments
	•		Low	bicarbonate	and	high	potassium	values
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

544 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
the	RePEAT	risk	adjustment	score.	Analytic	models	such	as	RePEAT	
have good calibration and discrimination with respect to predict
-
ing ED care and hospital admission. Furthermore, analytic models 
that compare costs and length of stay between EDs are improved by 
adjusting	for	severity	of	illness	using	the	RePEAT	score.	RePEAT	is	a	
reasonable objective marker of severity of illness that could be used in 
the administrative process comparing outcomes between EDs. With 
implementation	of	scoring	systems	such	as	PRISA	II	and	RePEAT,	
U.S. EDs can benchmark the care that they provide to children and 
make meaningful improvements to ensure that this care is equitable 
and evidence- based.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
77.3
  Principles Applicable to the 
Developing World
David M. Walker and Victorio R. Tolentino Jr.
The maturity of pediatric emergency medicine (PEM) in any given 
area depends on the healthcare priorities and resources of that geo
-
graphic or physical setting. The places in which emergency care takes 
place range from the community (especially for those with no access 
to organized medical care) to state- of- the- art pediatric emergency 
departments (EDs), typically in larger population centers. The scope 
ranges from the care of the individual patient to the management of 
populations of children involved in large- scale disasters. Barriers to 
quality care vary in each situation and in each part of the world, with 
the implication for the PEM practitioner that the care provided must 
be relevant to the local context of healthcare.
CONTINUUM- OF- CARE MODEL
This Emergency Medical Services for Children (EMSC) framework can 
also be applied to discussion of emergency care for children on a global 
level (see 
Chapter 77
). Although medical infrastructure in some parts 
of the developing world may not be consistent or well organized, or 
has been weakened by civil strife, natural disasters, or economic loss, 
the EMSC framework can still apply generally to individual healthcare 
systems.
Prevention
Infectious Diseases
International child health has focused mainly on reducing the inci
-
dence of preventable childhood illnesses, primarily through immuni
-
zation initiatives. Enormous advances have been realized in measles, 
neonatal tetanus, and polio; wild- type smallpox was eradicated in 
1978. Although there are advocates for providing primary care inter
-
ventions (e.g., vaccinations) in the ED, the role of the PEM practitioner 
in this area of prevention has been limited.
 
Injuries
Injuries are a leading cause of childhood morbidity and mortality. 
Unintentional injuries constitute 90% of injury mortality to chil
-
dren 5- 19 years old and are the cause of 9% of the world’s mortality 
(see 
Chapter 14
). Intentional injuries, which remain underrecog
-
nized and underreported, make a smaller but significant contribu
-
tion. Unintentional injuries cause more than 2,000 childhood deaths 
daily,	or	950,000	annually	worldwide.	The	burden	of	these	deaths	is	
borne disproportionately by children in middle-  and lower- income 
countries, where >95% of all injury- related deaths occur. For each 
of these deaths, many more children are permanently disabled, and 
an even larger number are treated and released without permanent 
sequelae.
Traffic-	related	injuries,	burns,	and	drowning	are	the	main	causes	of	
injury- related mortality in children. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) have out
-
lined several proven injury prevention strategies of which child health 
practitioners in the global community must be aware. Although these 
strategies have proved effective, the data are based on U.S. research and 
may not be generalizable to other countries.
 
Out- of- Hospital Care
Out- of- hospital care comprises access to emergency services, pre
-
hospital care, and interfacility transport of patients. Morbidity and 
mortality arise from delayed or limited access to emergency care, 
lack of prehospital care, transport without proper monitoring or 
trained personnel, or delayed transport to a higher level of care. 
Safe transport of seriously ill children is a neglected global health 
issue. An emergency response system must address the following 
links in the patient’s care: a communication system with prompt 
activation of emergency medical services (EMS), the correct assess
-
ment and initial treatment of the patient, and the rapid transport to 
definitive care.
Access to Care
When a child is injured or ill, a parent or caretaker must be able to 
access help and activate EMS. In the majority of low-  and middle- 
income countries, no universal emergency numbers have been estab
-
lished, requiring access by direct dialing to an ambulance, if such 
private services exist. In countries that have a universal emergency 
number, barriers remain related to absence of phones in some house
-
holds, unclear addresses in rural areas, and insufficient reach of the 
emergency system.
In most low-  and middle- income countries, the family must bring 
the ill or injured child to the health facility for stabilization and 
treatment. For this to occur, families must also overcome financial 
and geographic barriers, which can result in delayed presentation 
for	care.	This	delay	predictably	increases	the	likelihood	of	associ
-
ated complications and decreases the likelihood of full recovery and 
survival.
 
Prehospital Care
In regions with maturing EMS systems, there must be adequately 
trained personnel to stabilize and transport the child to a medical facil
-
ity. The quality and level of training of such prehospital personnel vary 
among countries and within regions of the same country. In urban 
areas, there is a greater concentration of medical care and therefore 
a greater opportunity to have strong prehospital training. In most of 
Asia and sub- Saharan Africa, trained personnel are used primarily to 
transfer patients between health facilities, not from the initial site of 
illness or injury. In most high- income countries, medical services are 
dispatched to the patient.
Around the world, the effort to establish standardized approaches 
to prehospital care exists primarily in the form of courses to edu
-
cate EMS and hospital personnel in the emergency management of 
patients. The WHO manuals 
Prehospital Trauma Care Systems
 and 
Guidelines for Essential Trauma Care
 focus on guidelines for prehos
-
pital and trauma care systems that are affordable and sustainable. The 
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) course “Pediatric Education 
for Prehospital Professionals” is a dynamic, modularized teaching tool 
designed to provide specific pediatric prehospital education that can 
be adapted to any EMS system. 
Table	77.6
 describes additional pre
-
hospital resources.
Although most middle-  and high- income countries have a system 
of trained EMS workers, lower- income countries lack this advanced 
tier of emergency care. In these countries, commercial drivers, vol
-
unteers,	and	willing	bystanders	provide	the	first	line	of	care.	Training	
a cadre of first responders can rely on existing networks of aid or 
can be drawn from specific populations, such as students, soldiers, 
or	public	servants.	Training	needs	to	emphasize	basic	lifesaving	and	
limb- saving interventions, including how to stop bleeding and sup
-
port breathing, access advanced care, and splint broken limbs. In 
Ghana, for example, taxi drivers participated in a first- aid course that 
relied heavily on demonstration and practice rather than knowledge 
transfer	through	didactic	sessions.	Taxi	drivers	were	selected	because	
they	already	provided	much	of	the	transport	for	injured	patients.	Two	
years after the course, external evaluators favorably rated the quality 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77
 u 
Emergency Medical  Services for Children 
545
of their care compared with untrained drivers. In rural areas, such 
first responders become vital in providing emergency interventions 
when more definitive care is distant. Thus a system of trained first 
responders forms the foundation of an effective prehospital system.
In the French model, a physician, often an emergency medicine spe
-
cialist, will review calls for acuity and can dispatch a physician- led team 
by ambulance to go to the patient’s home to assess, stabilize, and initi
-
ate treatment. This Franco- German system is used in other countries, 
including many in Latin America and Europe. There are no clear data 
on the cost- effectiveness and patient outcomes associated with delivery 
of patients to the nearest facility vs bringing hospital resources to the 
patient.
 
  
In many low- income countries, there is no reliable means of trans
-
port. Health centers may only have one vehicle for transport to a 
able 77.6 
 
  Pediatric Emergency Care Resources
PREHOSPITAL CARE
Emergency Pediatric Care
Course developed by the National Association of Emergency 
Medical Technicians (NAEMT) focused on field treatment of sick 
and injured children. Course is open to physicians, nurses, EMTs, 
and paramedics.
Website: 
https://www.naemt.org/education/epc
Pediatric Trauma Life Support for Prehospital Care Providers
An 8- hour pediatric prehospital course sponsored by the global 
organization International Trauma Life Support (ITLS)
Website: 
https://www.itrauma.org/education/itls- pediatric/
Pediatric Education for Prehospital Professionals (PEPP)
Curriculum designed specifically to teach prehospital professionals 
how to assess and manage ill or injured children.
Website: 
https://www.peppsite.com/
HOSPITAL CARE
Pocket Book of Hospital Care for Children: Second Edition
WHO publication providing guidelines for the management of 
common illnesses in resource- limited settings; incorporates 
 
both the Emergency Triage Assessment and Treatment (ETAT) 
and Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI) 
 
guidelines.
Website: 
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/978- 92- 4- 
154837- 3
African Federation of Emergency Medicine (AFEM) Handbook of 
Acute and Emergency Care
Management strategies organized according to low- , moderate- , and 
full- resource settings.
Website: 
https://afem.africa/project/afem- handbook- of- acute- and- 
emergency- care/
African Federation of Emergency Medicine (AFEM) Rapid Approach 
Protocols for Children
Open- access clinical protocols for common presenting problems in 
children. Includes differential diagnoses and recommendations on 
initial investigations.
Website: 
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/cwhcl3eu8vrvwqu/AAA- 
MSDs9u3Y0SIgwU1R3hFxa?dl=0
African Federation of Emergency Medicine (AFEM) Tier 1 Paediatric 
Emergency Medicine Curriculum
Open- access curriculum targeted to nurses, EMS personnel, 
pharmacists, and other providers who care for acutely ill and injured 
children. Organized into modules by clinical presentation or disease 
processes.
Website: 
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/pgv8zd5y6z1elvo/AAA_df2fUj
1bSzABbjZFjSgfa?dl=0
Standards of Care for Children in Emergency Departments, 
 
Version 3.0
Open- access document from the International Federation of 
Emergency Medicine that proposes worldwide standards for 
pediatric emergency care.
Website: 
https://www.ifem.cc/standards_of_care_for_children_in_
emergency_departments_v3_2019
African Emergency Nursing Curriculum
Open- access educational framework for emergency nursing practice 
in resource- limited settings. Developed by the African Federation of 
Emergency Nurses.
Website: 
http://afem.co.za/wp- content/uploads/2017/10/AFEM- 
African- Emergency- Nursing- Curriculum.pdf
HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES
Manual for the Health Care of Children in Humanitarian Emergencies
WHO publication that provides comprehensive guidance on childcare 
in emergencies; includes information on care of traumatic injuries 
and mental health emergencies.
Website: 
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241596879
Pediatric Disaster Care Centers of Excellence (United States)
Coalition of medical centers and government agencies established to 
guide the delivery of pediatric healthcare services in a disaster.
Website: 
https://emscimprovement.center/domains/preparedness/asprcoe/
MENTAL HEALTH EMERGENCIES
The Mental Health & Psychosocial Support Network
A hosted online practice network organized around crowdsourcing 
of mental health and psychosocial support resources for use in 
emergencies and ongoing humanitarian crises in the developing world.
Website: 
https://mhpss.net/
Save the Children Psychological First Aid Training
Practitioner training manual dedicated to the provision of 
psychological first aid to children exposed to trauma.
Website: 
https://resourcecentre.savethechildren.net/document- 
collections/save- children- psychological- first- aid- training
Psychological First Aid: Guide for Field Workers
Open- access training manual from the WHO for those who may 
respond to large- scale crises.
Website: 
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241548205
ACCESS TO ACADEMIC PUBLICATIONS RELEVANT TO PEM
PEMdatabase.org
A website devoted to pediatric emergency medicine (PEM). Contains 
links to conferences, evidence- based medicine reviews, research 
networks, and professional organizations.
Website: 
www.pemdatabase.org
HINARI Access to Research for Health Programme
Program established by WHO and others to enable developing 
countries to gain access to one of the world’s largest collections of 
biomedical and health literature.
Website: 
https://partnership.who.int/hinari
ORGANIZATIONS INVOLVED IN GLOBAL PEM ACTIVITIES
  American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) Ambassador Program 
Provides the names of U.S.-boarded emergency medicine physicians who 
can provide advice and information on issues pertaining to the progress 
and status of emergency medicine in their assigned countries.
 
Website: 
https://www.acep.org/intl/ambassador-program/
 U.  S. Agency for International Development (USAID)
Government agency providing U.S. economic and humanitarian 
 
assistance worldwide.
Website: 
https://www.usaid.gov/global- health/health- areas/maternal- 
and- child- health/technical- areas/child- health
Child Health and Development Unit, World Health Organization (WHO)
United Nations agency dedicated to child health.
Website: 
https://www.who.int/teams/maternal- newborn- child- 
adolescent- health- and- ageing/child- health
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
Organization dedicated to providing lifesaving assistance to children 
affected by disasters and to protecting their rights in any circumstances; 
formerly United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund.
Website: 
www.unicef.org
Safe Kids Worldwide
International nonprofit organization dedicated to preventing 
unintentional childhood injury.
Website: 
www.safekids.org
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

546 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
higher- level facility. This vehicle may also be used for outreach pri
-
mary care services, such as offering immunizations and collecting 
drugs and equipment from a central supply location, and some
-
times, improperly for personal reasons by local officials or politi
-
cians. In large cities, taxis and auto rickshaws are frequently used 
because they are rapidly available, well disseminated, and able to 
pass around traffic jams. Where organized prehospital systems exist, 
different types of vehicles are adapted for emergency transportation. 
The WHO recommends identifying transport vehicles in advance, 
choosing vehicles that can be repaired and maintained locally, and 
equipping the vehicles according to recognized standards. The pro
-
vision of available and appropriately staffed and equipped transport 
vehicles is crucial to the realization of recommended emergency 
care plans.
 
Hospital- Based Care
Once a child has reached a medical facility for the care of an injury 
or illness, adequate emergency services should be available. In many 
countries the ED serves only as a triage area where patients are distin
-
guished by their likely disease process and directed for admission to 
the corresponding unit within the hospital. Strengthening emergency 
services includes seeing the ED as a unit where definitive treatment 
can be provided to the ill and injured child. Critically ill children must 
receive not only prompt care but also correct care. Such expedience and 
accuracy are ensured by implementation of an effective triage system, 
moving the sickest patients to immediate care and standardizing the 
initial care of emergency conditions.
Triage
Too	often,	children	presenting	to	EDs	are	treated	on	a	first-	come	first-	
served basis in an approach that creates long waiting times for critically 
ill children, a contributor to unnecessary mortality. Medical facilities 
should adopt an efficient and effective triage system to respond rap
-
idly to the needs of patients and to assign the appropriate amount of 
resources. The WHO has developed a course entitled 
Emergency Tri
-
age Assessment and Treatment (ETAT)
. This course teaches emer
-
gency, priority, or nonurgent signs and how to provide emergency 
treatment	for	life-	threatening	conditions.	ETAT	emphasizes	the	evalu
-
ation	of	a	patient’s	ABCD	status	to	identify	emergency	situations—the	
patency of the airway (A), the quality of breathing (B), the quality of 
circulation and presence of coma or convulsions (C), and the presence 
of severe dehydration (D).
One	of	the	benefits	of	the	ETAT	guidelines	is	that	they	can	be	adapted	
to centers with limited resources and are applicable to areas with high 
morbidity and mortality from meningitis, dehydration, malaria, respi
-
ratory illness, and malnutrition. Another benefit is that the care algo
-
rithms are based on limited diagnostic studies, that is, hemoglobin 
measurement, blood smear for malaria, and bedside blood glucose 
testing. Widely accepted triage assessment guidelines are teachable to 
emergency care staff, and their adoption can provide better organiza
-
tion within a healthcare center. At the Queen Elizabeth Central Hospi
-
tal in Blantyre, Malawi, for example, the institution of triage and rapid 
treatment in its emergency care center led to a 50% decrease in the 
mortality of children within 24 hours of presentation to the hospital, 
with a further 50% decrease as implementation and practice of triaging 
patients have continued.
Beyond triage, education on overall emergency center organization 
is a low- resource intervention that can reduce some of the obstacles to 
quality care delivery. Additionally, the arrangement of short- stay areas 
(hydration and infusion rooms) within or near the ED can lessen the 
burden on inpatient units.
 
Pediatric- Specific Emergency Centers
Anecdotally, most countries have developed at least one pediatric- 
capable center, usually as part of an academic medical center. The 
emergency services in these centers are variable, but certainly can be 
a starting point from which to build overall improvement in pediatric 
emergency care.
 
Practitioners
Throughout the world, nurses, paramedics, nonphysician clinicians, 
and nonspecialist physicians deliver most of the care to acutely ill or 
injured children. The majority of sick children attend local clinics or 
district or central hospitals, where financial and human resources 
are not always matched to the potential acuity of presenting patient 
complaints. Nominal supervision is provided to staff attending these 
patients. Pediatric EDs located in tertiary hospitals are often staffed 
by training physicians with little or no supervision from faculty, who 
themselves may have limited exposure to or training in pediatric emer
-
gencies. General hospitals lack dedicated pediatric staff; guidelines as 
to which patients should be moved to a higher level of care are often 
not standardized and depend on local influences and/or cultural beliefs 
about health and illness.
 
Clinical Guidelines
The 
Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI)
 guide
-
lines were developed by the WHO and UNICEF to provide assistance 
in the initial triage and management of the presenting signs and symp
-
toms of the major killers of children <5 years old in first- level health 
facilities (e.g., clinics, health centers, outpatient departments of hospi
-
tals). The flow charts within each chapter of the IMCI manuals allow 
easy accessibility to materials that can enhance education and outreach 
to less experienced health workers.
Evaluations in various countries of the implementation of IMCI 
guidelines have shown improvements in health worker performance 
and quality of care, as well as decreases in delay in treatment and mor
-
tality of the under- 5 population. These guidelines also dramatically 
reduce the cost of healthcare. The WHO website provides all the neces
-
sary implementation tools, including course manuals and evaluation 
tools.
The International Federation of Emergency Medicine developed 
Standards of Care for Children in Emergency Departments to improve 
emergency care globally. These standards are not just aimed at dedi
-
cated EDs, but at any setting where emergency care takes place, regard
-
less of the providers or the resources available. At the same time, 
however, the existence of the standards allows sites to advocate for 
improved resources dedicated to expertise in the various aspects of 
providing quality emergency care for children. The standards address 
design of care spaces, child-  and family- centered care, assessment of 
ill and injured children, staff training and competencies, quality and 
safety, and disaster response.
 
Trauma
Morbidity and mortality from trauma are among the most prevalent 
problems	for	children	worldwide.	Trauma	care	presents	the	challenge	
of sequential, often simple, interventions that must be performed in 
a timely manner to limit the severity of the outcome. However, with 
lack of specific training, signs and symptoms of pediatric trauma may 
go	unrecognized	or	may	be	underappreciated.	Trauma	courses	such	as	
Advanced	Trauma	Life	Support	(ATLS)	are	educational	tools	that	can	
be disseminated to improve the quality of care at emergency centers 
worldwide. For low- resource settings, the WHO has developed the 
Integrated Management for Emergency and Essential Surgical Care 
toolkit, which provides clear directions and reasoning for the initial 
care	of	injured	patients.	Not	expressly	addressed	in	the	ATLS	course	
is specific concern about child abuse as the cause of trauma. This is 
an area of pediatric care that many countries do not yet address com
-
prehensively in their medical training, their law enforcement, or their 
judicial systems. The epidemiologic need for reliable trauma registries 
is great, as is the need to identify personnel with trauma management 
skill sets and dedicated trauma centers to serve as higher- level refer
-
ral sites.
 
Equipment
Pediatric emergency equipment guidelines are available for a variety of 
settings where acutely ill and injured children would present. Although 
these equipment guidelines may represent minimum supplies to treat 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 77
 u 
Emergency Medical  Services for Children 
547
the widest variety of pediatric emergencies, the roles of substitution 
and improvisation often provide for the equivalent function of recom
-
mended supplies.
 
 
After the initial stabilization, children requiring ongoing care are 
admitted to the hospital. The quality of inpatient services varies 
greatly depending on institutional and provider experience, comfort 
with pediatric conditions, and the resources available to treat them. 
The WHO has produced the 
Pocket Book of Hospital Care for Children,
 
which is based on IMCI guidelines and focuses on inpatient manage
-
ment of high- morbidity/high- mortality illnesses common in develop
-
ing countries.
 
  
The recognition of mental health conditions among the pediatric pop
-
ulation is continuing to evolve. It is estimated that about 15% of chil
-
dren globally suffer from anxiety, depression, or other mental health 
challenges. The prevalence of mental health problems is likely higher, 
as much of the existing data comes from Europe and North Amer
-
ica, whereas a majority of children live in middle-  and lower- income 
regions of the world.
Mental health capacity varies by country and is reflective of cultural 
beliefs about mental health and the priority and funding that local 
governments have allocated to address these concerns. It is widely 
accepted that the current global mental health infrastructure fails to 
meet the existing demands of the world’s population. These concerns 
are amplified in the developing world and disproportionately affect 
children whose lives are often touched by emotional and social trauma 
(e.g., poverty, natural disasters, armed conflict).
Increasingly, children are presenting to emergency settings in crisis. 
In many developing countries, mental health services are concentrated 
in urban settings and lacking in rural areas. Where there is no shortage 
of medical personnel, expertise in child psychiatry corresponds with 
the local development of this specialty. In areas with no formal men
-
tal health system, care is provided by an informal network of family 
members, faith healers, or community leaders who do not have for
-
mal medical training. It is essential that children presenting for mental 
health evaluation receive a comprehensive examination, as certain psy
-
chiatric presentations can be rooted in infectious diseases conditions 
or inadequate nutrition, which are prevalent in some developing world 
contexts.
The WHO has provided examples of best practice in the acute treat
-
ment of mental health conditions in 
Hospital- Based Mental Health 
Services: Promoting Person- Centered and Rights- Based Approaches
. 
This document is available as a section of the 
Guidance and Techni
-
cal Packages on Community Mental Health Services
 available on the 
WHO website. Although the publication does not include examples 
of pediatric- specific care, the document is meant to be tailored to the 
local context and can be adapted to the needs of children.
 

Telemedicine	technology	is	one	way	to	overcome	provider	shortages	or	
geographic challenges that can affect the care of acutely ill and injured 
children. Patients and families can potentially access basic emergency 
care through video- based platforms. The responding provider can use 
established triage techniques to help determine the severity of illness 
and the need for consultation at a healthcare center; they can also rec
-
ommend basic first aid as needed.
Access to real- time lectures, case discussions, and conferences, 
led by experts in PEM, can increase the capacity of those in limited- 
resource settings to provide care for pediatric emergency patients. 
These	educational	offerings	can	also	provide	a	forum	for	a	bilat
-
eral exchange of ideas and perspectives. Expert consultations via 
real- time telemedicine programs or a store- and- forward process, 
in which the request for consultation is recorded and sent to an 
expert who can reply typically over email, can be used. Additionally, 
within a given region, telemedicine can link the referring hospital 
to the receiving hospital in order to collaborate on decisions about 
management and the need for transfer.
The success of telemedicine collaborations depends on a variety of 
factors, including availability of easy- to- use technology and reliable 
internet access.
 
HUMANITARIAN DISASTERS
Children are a vulnerable population who experience dispropor
-
tionate suffering during humanitarian emergencies, either natural 
(earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes, floods, droughts) or manmade 
(armed conflicts, terrorist attacks). The under- 5 population is espe
-
cially susceptible to infectious diseases, malnutrition, and trauma 
after disasters.
The	WHO	
Manual for the Health Care of Children in Humani
-
tarian Emergencies
 is based on IMCI guidelines and addresses the 
emergency care of children in disaster situations where hospi
-
tal facilities and resources are not immediately available. It goes 
beyond the IMCI guidelines by discussing initial assessment and 
management of trauma, burns, poisonings, neonatal illness, and 
psychosocial problems, which are considered high priority in acute 
care settings.
Exchange and Dissemination of Information
The WHO established the internet- based 
HINARI
 Access to Research 
for Health Programme in 2002 to provide institutions in low- resource 
countries free or reduced- cost access to medical literature. Registration 
for the program is required. Eligibility is based on national economic 
or development criteria.
Another valuable tool is the website pemdatabase.org. This nonpro
-
prietary site was started as an online resource for PEM practitioners. It 
contains links to PEM abstracts and articles, evidence- based reviews, 
pediatric resuscitation websites, and relevant journals, as well as PEM 
conferences and professional organizations.
In countries where internet access continues to be a barrier, resources 
for education and research may be limited to out- of- date textbooks and 
journals.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

548 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Identifying the acutely ill child in the ambulatory setting is a chal
-
lenge. Children presenting to pediatricians’ offices, urgent care prac
-
tices, and emergency departments (EDs) may have a range of illnesses 
from simple viral infections to life- threatening emergencies. Although 
most children in this setting will have a benign course of illness, it is 
incumbent on the pediatric practitioner to discern quickly and accu
-
rately which children are likely to deteriorate from potentially serious 
or life- threatening disease. When assessing an acutely ill child, prac
-
titioners must remember that the early signs of severe illness may be 
subtle. There are about five pediatric triage system tools that assess the 
severity of illness and thus the degree of needed interventions. One 
example is presented in 
Table	78.1
.
ASSESSMENT OF VITAL SIGNS
Assessment of vital signs is critical in all pediatric visits for acute ill
-
ness, including temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood 
pressure. Normal vital signs vary with age. Although there have been 
increasing efforts to build evidence- based vital sign cutoffs for differ
-
ent age- groups, most institutions use nonempirically derived cutoffs 
such as those in Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS). 
Tachycardia
 
is common in children presenting for acute care and can result from 
benign (fever, pain, dehydration) to life- threatening (septic shock, 
hemorrhage, multisystem inflammatory system in children [MIS- C], 
dysrhythmia, heart failure, hyperthyroidism) conditions. An abnormal 
heart rate should prompt a full history and physical examination, as 
described later, and careful 
reassessment
 (often multiple times) after the 
presumed cause is identified and treated. Most children will improve 
after initiation of simple interventions such as antipyretics or analgesia. 
Tachycardia	that	persists	after	fever,	pain,	and	dehydration	have	been	
treated 
must
 be evaluated further, particularly if the child appears ill or 
has a deficit in perfusion or altered mental state.
Tachypnea
 is also common among ill children and has many causes, 
including fever, respiratory conditions (bronchiolitis, asthma, pneu
-
monia), cardiac disease (heart failure), and metabolic acidosis (shock, 
poisoning, diabetic ketoacidosis). Like tachycardia, tachypnea often 
resolves with antipyretics in febrile children and should be reassessed 
to ensure resolution once fever has been managed. In cases where 
bronchiolitis and asthma have been ruled out, persistent tachypnea 
and fever can be a sign of pneumonia, even in the absence of focal 
lung findings on examination. Consider evaluation for metabolic aci
-
dosis in cases of significant tachypnea without apparent pulmonary 
or cardiac causes. 
Apnea
 is a sign of respiratory failure and should be 
treated emergently with bag- valve- mask ventilation and immediate ED 
evaluation.
Hypotension
 is rare in children and, when present, it is a sign of 
critical illness. Children with hypotension should be evaluated in an 
ED. Hypotension is evidence of decompensated circulatory shock and 
can result from severe dehydration, sepsis, hemorrhage, neurogenic 
spinal shock, anaphylaxis, or cardiogenic shock.
Pulse oximetry (oxygen- hemoglobin saturation, Sp
o
2
) should be 
assessed in children with respiratory or cardiac illness/compromise 
and in children with underlying abnormalities of oxygenation. Healthy 
children have Sp
o
2
 >95%. The practitioner should consider evaluating 
for any underlying respiratory or cardiac causes in children with Sp
o
2
 
<93–95%. For children with underlying abnormalities, the child’s base
-
line Sp
o
2
 should be assessed and alterations from that baseline should 
be investigated further.
The combination of bradycardia, hypertension, and altered breath
-
ing known as 
Cushing triad
 can be a sign of life- threatening increased 
intracranial pressure (ICP) and should be evaluated in an ED. Aniso
-
coria and a sixth cranial nerve palsy are other signs of increased ICP. 
Toxidromes
 should also be considered in children with abnormal 
combinations of vital signs (see 
Chapter 94
).
 
HISTORY
A thorough history is paramount to identifying patients whose con
-
dition will require prompt intervention. Obtaining an accurate his
-
tory from young patients is challenging, particularly with preverbal or 
anxious children who are unable or unwilling to localize the source of 
their discomfort. In such instances, parents or caretakers often provide 
the most important information, and their perceptions of the child’s 
course of illness must be carefully considered. Pediatricians should be 
guided by the patient’s chief complaint to ask 
open- ended questions
 that 
help distinguish between benign and potentially life- threatening dis
-
ease entities. The most common complaints leading to acute care vis
-
its among children include fever, headache and altered mental status, 
trauma, abdominal pain and vomiting, respiratory distress, and chest 
pain. 
Table	78.2
 describes signs and symptoms and risk factors that 
should prompt immediate transfer to an ED or, if already in the ED, 
initiation of rapid intervention.
Fever
 is the most common reason for a sick- child visit. Most cases 
of fever are the result of self- limited viral infection. However, pediatri
-
cians need to be aware of the age- dependent potential for serious bac
-
terial	or	viral	infections,	such	as	urinary	tract	infection	(UTI),	sepsis,	
meningitis, pneumonia, acute abdominal infection, and osteoarticular 
infection.
During the first 2 months of life, the neonate is at risk for sepsis 
caused by pathogens that are uncommon in older children. These 
organisms include group B streptococcus, 
Escherichia coli, Listeria 
monocytogenes,
 and herpes simplex virus (HSV). In neonates, the his
-
tory must include maternal obstetric information and the patient’s 
birth history. Risk factors for sepsis include untreated maternal group 
B streptococcus colonization, prematurity, chorioamnionitis, and pro
-
longed rupture of membranes. If there is a maternal history of sexu
-
ally	transmitted	infections	(STIs)	during	the	pregnancy,	the	differential	
diagnosis must be expanded to include infection with those pathogens. 
Septic infants can present with lethargy, poor feeding, grunting respi
-
rations, and cool or mottled extremities in addition to fever (or hypo
-
thermia). Febrile infants in the first 1 to 2 months of life should be 
evaluated broadly for infection, including sampling blood, urine, and, 
in some cases, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (see 
Chapter 220
).
When the infant matures beyond 2 months of age and receives their 
first set of vaccinations, serious bacterial infections become less com
-
mon. Evaluation to rule out serious infection is an important part of 
treating the febrile older child. Children with fever should have a full 
set of vital signs, history, and physical examination to ensure that criti
-
cal illness is absent and to identify any focal source. Red flags for 
septic 
shock
 include hypotension, poor perfusion, altered mental status, or 
the presence of purpuric or erythrodermic rash. Red flags for 
menin
-
gitis
 include severe headache, meningismus, and altered mental state. 
The presence of any of these signs should prompt emergency evalua
-
tion in the ED or rapid treatment if the patient is already in the ED.
Additional focal findings to consider include evaluation for acute 
otitis media, pharyngitis, pneumonia, abdominal infections (bacterial 
enteritis, appendicitis), skin and soft tissue infections, septic arthritis, 
and	osteomyelitis.	Occult	UTI	should	be	considered	if	three	of	the	
following risk factors are present: age <1 year, fever >39°C, fever >48 
hours, and no focal source of fever. Pneumonia should be considered in 
the presence of tachypnea, hypoxia, or focal findings on chest examina
-
tion. Bacteremia is rare in the post–pneumococcal and 
Haemophilus 
influenzae
 vaccine era but should be considered if staphylococcal infec
-
tion or meningococcemia is suspected and in unvaccinated children or 
children with signs of septic shock. In addition to infection, inflamma
-
tory conditions to consider include juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), 
macrophage activating syndrome (MAS
), Kawasaki disease (KD), and 
MIS- C. The diagnosis of KD, MIS- C, or MAS should be considered if 
Chapter 
78
Triage of the Acutely Ill 
Child
Anna K. Weiss and Frances B. Balamuth
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 78
 u 
Triage of the Acutely Ill Child 
549
the patient meets the diagnostic criteria for that illness, although some 
patients may have an atypical or incomplete presentation (see 
Chapters 
207
 and 208).
For patients presenting in an 
altered mental state
, the pediatrician 
should inquire about symptoms such as fever or headache. Screening 
questions should explore feeding changes, medications in the household, 
ill contacts, and the possibility of trauma. Parents will often describe 
a febrile child as lethargic, but further questioning will reveal a tired- 
appearing child who interacts appropriately when no longer febrile. The 
child who appears ill only when febrile must be differentiated from the 
lethargic patient who presents with suspected sepsis or meningitis and 
from the child whose altered behavior is secondary to an intracranial 
emergency or seizure. Infants with meningitis, sepsis, or cardiac defects 
may have a history of irritability, inconsolability, poor feeding, grunt
-
ing breathing, seizures, poor urine output, and/or color changes such as 
pallor, mottling, or cyanosis. Patients with poisoning or inborn error of 
metabolism can also present with lethargy, poor feeding, unusual odors, 
seizures, and vomiting. 
Nonaccidental trauma
 should always be consid
-
ered in a lethargic infant, particularly in the absence of additional signs 
or symptoms. In infants and young toddlers, rapidly growing head cir
-
cumference or bulging anterior fontanel may signal increased ICP. Older 
children may present with altered mental state as a result of meningitis/
encephalitis, trauma, or ingestions. School- age children and adolescents 
with meningitis may have a history of fever and neck pain; other associ
-
ated symptoms may include rash, headache, photophobia, or vomiting. 
Children with ingestions can present with other abnormal neurologic 
symptoms, such as ataxia, slurred speech, and seizures, or with charac
-
teristic constellations of vital sign changes and other physical findings 
consistent with certain toxidromes.
In patients with 
headache
, ask questions about the chronicity of the 
headache and any accompanying symptoms. Headaches that occur 
upon arising in the morning, that are worse when lying flat, or that 
are accompanied by vomiting are concerning for increased ICP. Simi
-
larly, headache accompanied by focal neurologic deficit(s) should be 
referred to an ED for urgent head imaging. Although migraine head
-
aches in teenagers are similar in presentation to those in adults (uni
-
lateral, throbbing, accompanied by an aura), pediatric practitioners 
should be aware that migraines in prepubertal children may have a 
nonclassic presentation; may be bilateral; and may not be accompanied 
by aura, photophobia, or phonophobia.
Parents may interpret a variety of symptoms as 
respiratory distress
, 
and care must be taken to distinguish normal and benign respiratory 
patterns	from	true	respiratory	distress.	Tachypnea	secondary	to	fever	is	
a common source of parental anxiety, and parents of newborn infants 
are sometimes alarmed by the presence of periodic breathing. Parents 
should be questioned about their child’s other symptoms, such as fever, 
limitation of neck movement, drooling, choking, and the presence of 
stridor or wheezing. A history of apnea or cyanosis warrants further 
investigation. Practitioners should also remember that tachypnea in 
a child without evidence of true respiratory distress may be evidence 
of compensation for shock or metabolic acidosis, both of which will 
require rapid treatment. Although wheezing is often secondary to 
bronchospasm, it can also be caused by cardiac disease or congenital 
airway anomalies such as vascular rings. Parents may interpret 
stridor
 
as noisy breathing or wheezing. Stridor is most frequently caused by 
upper airway obstruction such as croup. However, anatomic abnor
-
malities such as laryngeal webs, laryngomalacia, subglottic stenosis, 
and	paralyzed	vocal	cords	also	cause	stridor.	Toddlers	who	present	
with breathing difficulty after a coughing or choking episode should 
be evaluated for 
foreign body aspiration
. In these cases, practitioners 
must ask about the possibility of button- battery ingestion, as this con
-
stitutes a true medical emergency that warrants immediate endoscopic 
removal or transfer to a facility that can perform the procedure. In 
toxic- appearing children with stridor, the pediatrician should consider 
epiglottitis, bacterial tracheitis, or a rapidly expanding retropharyn
-
geal abscess. The incidence of epiglottitis has greatly declined with the 
advent of the 
H. influenzae
 type b (Hib) vaccine, but it remains a pos
-
sibility in the unimmunized or partially immunized patient. Children 
with retropharyngeal abscesses may also present with drooling and 
limitation of neck movement (especially hyperextension) after a recent 
upper respiratory infection or penetrating mouth injury.
Abdominal pain
 is a common complaint in the ambulatory set
-
ting and can herald either acute intraabdominal or pelvic pathology, 
or it can be a subtler sign of systemic illness. Both relatively benign 
(e.g.,	streptococcal	infection,	UTI,	pneumonia)	and	severe	abdomi
-
nal (e.g., appendicitis) or systemic (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis, MIS- 
C) illness can present with abdominal pain, and questions to the 
patient and parent should include whether there is an extraabdomi
-
nal source of discomfort. Questions should include details about 
pain onset and location; presence of accompanying symptoms, such 
able 78.1 
 
  Definition of Emergency Severity Index for Children
LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4
LEVEL 5
Cardiac arrest
Seizures
Sepsis, severe dehydration
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Child abuse, burns
Head trauma
Vitamins/iron or other overdoses/
ingestions
Infant less than 28 days of age with 
a fever of 38°C (100.4°F) or greater
1- 3 mo of age with a fever of 38°C 
(100.4°F) or greater may be 
 
considered up to II
Vital signs not stable
Multiple resources needed
3 mo to 3 yr of age 
 
T	>39°C	(102.2°F)
Single resource
needed
Only history, 
physical exam 
required
Respiratory arrest
Severe respiratory distress
SpO
2
	<90
Critically injured and unresponsive 
trauma patient
Severe respiratory distress 
 
with agonal or
Gasping- type respirations
Severe bradycardia or tachycardia 
with signs of
Hypoperfusion
Hypotension with signs of 
 
hypoperfusion
Trauma patient who needs 
 
resuscitation
Anaphylactic reaction
Baby who is flaccid
Hypoglycemia with a change in 
mental status
From Wang L, Zhou H, Zhu JF. Application of emergency severity index in pediatric emergency department. 
World J Emerg Med
. 2011;2(4):279- 282, 
Table 1
, p. 280.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

550 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
as fever and abdominal distention; and changes in feeding, urina
-
tion, and stooling patterns. Care should be taken to elicit a history 
of peritonitis or obstruction, including worsening pain with abrupt 
movements and persistent or bilious vomiting.
In neonates, a tender abdomen with or without bilious emesis 
should raise concern for the presence of a small bowel obstruc
-
tion	(e.g.,	volvulus).	These	infants	appear	ill	and	may	have	a	his
-
tory of decreased stooling. Pediatricians should be wary of neonates 
with abdominal tenderness and bloody stools, as 10% of cases of 
necrotizing enterocolitis occur in term infants. Infants with milk 
protein intolerance can also present with bloody stools, but these 
infants appear well and do not have abdominal tenderness. In older 
patients the differential diagnosis for emergency causes of abdomi
-
nal pain expands to include intussusception and appendicitis. 
Patients with intussusception present in a variety of ways, ranging 
from colicky abdominal pain but otherwise well between episodes 
to	being	lethargic	or	in	shock.	The	diagnosis	of	appendicitis	in	the	
child younger than 3 years is extremely difficult because children in 
this age- group cannot localize pain well. In adolescent females with 
abdominal pain, practitioners must obtain a menstrual and sexual 
history, as acute lower abdominal pain may be caused by adnexal 
pathology, including ovarian torsion or ectopic pregnancy.
For patients with 
vomiting
, pediatricians should ask if they have 
experienced bilious or blood- stained emesis, abdominal distention 
or constipation, weight changes, and diarrhea or bloody stools. 
An infant with bilious emesis and abdominal distention may have 
intestinal obstruction (as with midgut volvulus or Hirschsprung 
disease), whereas an infant who appears immediately hungry after 
nonbilious projectile vomiting may have pyloric stenosis. In an 
older child, vomiting may be caused by peritonitis or obstruction 
and by systemic illnesses, including diabetic ketoacidosis, inges
-
tion, or trauma. Patients with headache and vomiting raise the con
-
cern for increased ICP and should be questioned about neurologic 
changes, meningismus, and fever.
Practitioners should also obtain a thorough account of the child’s 
past medical history
. It is important to be aware of any underlying 
chronic problems that might predispose the child to recurring infec
-
tions or a serious acute illness. Children with sickle cell anemia, 
indwelling central venous access devices, or immune compromise 
are at increased risk for bacteremia and sepsis. Similarly, children 
with prior surgery, including ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement or 
intraabdominal procedures, can develop complications from their pre
-
vious surgeries.
 
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Observation is important when evaluating the acutely ill child. Most 
observational data that the pediatrician gathers should focus on assess
-
ing the child’s response to stimuli. Does the child awaken easily? Does 
the child smile and interact with the parent or with the examiner? Eval
-
uating these responses requires knowledge of normal child develop
-
ment and an understanding of the manner in which normal responses 
are elicited, depending on the child’s age.
During the physical examination, the pediatric practitioner seeks 
evidence of illness. The portions of the exam that require the child to be 
most cooperative are completed first. Initially, it is best to seat the child 
on the parent’s lap; the older child may be seated on the examination 
table. It is also important to assess the child’s willingness to move, as 
well as ease of movement. It is reassuring to see the child moving about 
on the parent’s lap with ease and without discomfort. 
Vital signs are 
often overlooked but are invaluable in assessing ill children.
 The presence 
of tachycardia out of proportion to fever and the presence of tachypnea 
and blood pressure abnormalities raise the suspicion for more serious 
illness. The respiratory evaluation includes determining respiratory 
rate; noting the presence or absence of hypoxia by Sp
o
2
; and noting 
any evidence of inspiratory stridor, expiratory wheezing, grunting, 
coughing, or increased work of breathing (e.g., retractions, nasal flar
-
ing, accessory muscle use). The 
skin
 should be carefully examined for 
rashes. Frequently, viral infections cause an exanthem, and many of 
these eruptions are diagnostic, such as the reticulated rash and slapped- 
cheek appearance of parvovirus infections and the stereotypical appear
-
ance of hand- foot- and- mouth disease caused by coxsackieviruses, as 
well as measles, chickenpox, and roseola. The skin examination may 
also yield evidence of more serious infections, including petechiae and 
purpura associated with bacteremia and erythroderma associated with 
a toxin- producing systemic infection. Cutaneous perfusion should be 
assessed by warmth and capillary refill time. The extremities may then 
be evaluated not only for ease of movement but also for the presence of 
swelling, warmth, tenderness, or alterations in perfusion. Such abnor
-
malities may indicate focal infections (e.g., cellulitis, bone/joint infec
-
tion) or vascular changes (e.g., arterial or venous thromboembolus).
When an infant is seated and is least perturbed, the examiner should 
assess the anterior fontanel to determine whether it is depressed, flat, 
or bulging. While the child is calm and cooperative, the 
eyes
 should 
be examined to identify features that might indicate an infectious or 
neurologic process. Often, viral infections result in watery discharge 
or redness of the bulbar conjunctivae. Bacterial infection, if superficial, 
Table 78.2 
 
  History and Examination Findings that Should 
Prompt Immediate Intervention and/or Transfer 
to Emergency Department
HISTORY AND EXAM 
 
FINDINGS
RISK FACTORS
RED FLAGS FOR RESPIRATORY FAILURE
Tachycardia
Tachypnea
Cyanosis
Apnea
Brief resolved unexplained event 
(BRUE) with cyanosis or change 
in tone
Suspected button- battery 
 
ingestion
Foreign body aspiration with 
 
respiratory distress
Sitting up, leaning forward, 
 
drooling
Respiratory distress with 
 
hypoxemia
Altered mental status
Tracheostomy
Ventilator dependence
History of critical airway
RED FLAGS FOR CIRCULATORY FAILURE
Tachycardia
Tachypnea
Cyanosis
Cold extremities, poor pulses
Apnea
Petechial or purpuric rashes
Erythroderma
Peritonitis
Bilious emesis
Post- tonsillectomy or post- 
adenoidectomy with bleeding
Extremity trauma with 
 
neurovascular deficits
Oncology (or other 
immunosuppressed) patients
Bone marrow or solid organ 
 
transplants
Sickle cell (or otherwise asplenic) 
patients
Infants	<60	days	old
Unrepaired or repaired congenital 
heart disease with change from 
baseline pulse oximetry
Bleeding disorder with trauma
RED FLAGS FOR NEUROLOGIC FAILURE
Tachycardia
Bradycardia- hypertension
Double vision
Ptosis
Unequal pupils
Apnea
Frequent or prolonged seizure(s)
Focal neurologic deficit(s)
Acute onset of severe headache
Suicidal or homicidal ideation
Psychosis
Ventriculoperitoneal shunt
Diabetes or metabolic disease 
with altered mental status
Hypoxic- ischemic encephalopathy
Clotting disorder with neurologic 
change(s)
Drug ingestion
Adapted from Farah MM, Tay Y, Lavelle J. A general approach to ill and injured 
children. In: Shaw KN, Bachur RG, eds. 
Fleischer and Ludwig’s Textbook of Pediatric 
Emergency Medicine,
 8th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2020.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 78
 u 
Triage of the Acutely Ill Child 
551
results in purulent drainage; if the infection is more deep- seated, ten
-
derness, swelling, and redness of the tissues surrounding the eye may 
be present, as well as proptosis, altered visual acuity, and impaired 
extraocular movements. Abnormalities in pupillary response, extra
-
ocular movements, or ptosis may also be indicators of cranial nerve 
abnormalities and, if new, are indications for head imaging.
During this initial portion of the physical examination, when the 
child is most comfortable (and therefore most likely to be quiet), the 
heart and lungs
 are auscultated. It is important to assess the ade
-
quacy of air entry into the lungs; the equality of breath sounds; and 
any evidence of adventitial breath sounds, especially wheezes, rales, 
or rhonchi. The coarse sound of air moving through a congested nasal 
passage is frequently transmitted to the lungs. The examiner can 
become attuned to these coarse sounds by placing the stethoscope 
near the child’s nose and then compensating for this sound as the 
chest is auscultated. The cardiac examination is next; findings such 
as pericardial friction rubs, loud murmurs, irregular rhythms, gallop 
rhythm, and distant heart sounds may indicate cardiac inflammation 
or infection. In the neonate, murmurs may herald congenital heart 
disease, especially in the presence of cyanosis, unequal extremity 
pulses, or a differential in upper-  vs lower- extremity blood pressures. 
A complete cardiac exam should also look for displacement of the 
point of maximal impulse (PMI) and the presence of jugular venous 
distention or facial plethora.
The components of the physical examination that are more bother
-
some to the child are completed last. This is best done with the patient 
on the examination table. Initially, the 
neck
 is examined to assess for 
areas of swelling, redness, or tenderness, as may be seen in cervical 
adenitis. Resistance to neck movement should prompt evaluation 
for signs of meningeal irritation or retropharyngeal abscess. During 
examination of the 
abdomen
,	the	diaper—if	present—is	removed.	
The abdomen is inspected for distention. Auscultation is performed to 
assess adequacy of bowel sounds, followed by palpation. Every attempt 
should be made to quiet a fussing child during this part of the exam; 
if this is not possible, practitioners should note that increased crying 
as the abdomen is palpated may indicate tenderness, especially if this 
finding is focally reproducible. In addition to focal tenderness, palpa
-
tion may elicit involuntary guarding or rebound tenderness (including 
tenderness to percussion); these findings indicate peritoneal irritation, 
as may be seen in appendicitis. During palpation of the abdomen, 
practitioners should look for signs of hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. 
When palpating the bottom- most edge of the liver or spleen, examiners 
should begin in the pelvis and work upward toward the ribs, because 
severe organomegaly can be missed if the examiner begins palpating 
in the mid- abdomen. The 
inguinal area and genitals
 are then exam
-
ined. One should assess the inguinal area for hernias. Care should be 
taken to examine the testicles of males with abdominal pain; testicu
-
lar trauma, testicular torsion, and epididymitis all may present with 
abdominal discomfort. A unilateral swollen or painful testicle with an 
absent cremasteric reflex on the affected side is concerning for testicu
-
lar torsion and should be referred for emergent ultrasound and uro
-
logic consultation. After the genital exam, the child is then placed in 
the prone position, and abnormalities of the 
back
 are sought. The spine 
and costovertebral angle areas are percussed to elicit any tenderness; 
such findings may be indicative of vertebral osteomyelitis or diskitis 
and pyelonephritis, respectively.
Examining the 
ears and throat
 completes the physical examination. 
These are usually the most bothersome parts of the examination for 
the child, and parents frequently can be helpful in minimizing head 
movement. During the oropharyngeal examination, it is important 
to document the presence of enanthems; these may be seen in many 
infectious processes, such as stomatitis caused by herpes or enterovi
-
ruses. This portion of the examination is also important in document
-
ing inflammation or exudates on the tonsils, which may indicate viral 
or bacterial infection. Findings such as trismus or unilateral tonsillar 
swelling are concerning for peritonsillar abscess and for infections in 
the parapharyngeal and retropharyngeal spaces; such cases should be 
referred for specialist ear, nose, and throat evaluation and potential 
imaging of the neck.
Repeating portions of the assessment may be indicated.
 If the child 
cried continuously during the initial clinical evaluation, the examiner 
may not be certain whether the crying was caused by the high fever, 
stranger anxiety, or pain or is indicative of a serious or localizing ill
-
ness. Constant crying also makes portions of the physical examina
-
tion, such as auscultation of the chest, more difficult. Before a repeat 
assessment is performed, efforts to make the child as comfortable as 
possible are indicated. In young infants, 
persistent irritability
, even 
when the examiner is absent from the room, is concerning for menin
-
gitis, encephalitis, or other causes of meningeal irritation (e.g., intra
-
cranial injury from nonaccidental trauma). When faced with a truly 
inconsolable infant, practitioners should have a low threshold to obtain 
head imaging and/or perform lumbar puncture, as the clinical scenario 
dictates.
 
MANAGEMENT
Most patients who present to the pediatrician’s office with an acute 
illness will not require acute stabilization. However, the pediatrician 
needs to be prepared to evaluate and begin resuscitation for the seri
-
ously ill or unstable child. Outpatient pediatric offices and urgent care 
facilities should be stocked with appropriate equipment necessary to 
stabilize an acutely ill child. Maintenance of that equipment and ongo
-
ing training of the office staff in its use are required, and every effort 
should be made to ensure that pediatric clinicians are PALS certified 
(see 
Chapter 79
).
The	evaluation	of	the	potentially	unstable	child	must	begin	with	
assessment	of	the	ABCs—airway,	breathing,	and	circulation.	When	
assessing the 
airway
, chest rise should be evaluated and evidence of 
increased	work	of	breathing	sought.	The	examiner	should	ensure	
that the trachea is midline and should listen carefully for evidence 
of air exchange at the level of the extrathoracic airway. If the air
-
way is patent and no signs of obstruction are present, the patient 
is allowed to assume a position of comfort. If the child shows signs 
of airway obstruction, repositioning of the head with the chin- 
lift maneuver may alleviate the obstruction. An oral or nasal air
-
way may be necessary in patients in whom airway patency cannot 
be	maintained.	These	devices	are	not	well	tolerated	in	conscious	
patients because they may induce gagging or vomiting; instead, they 
are most often used to facilitate effective bag- valve- mask ventilation 
in semiconscious or unconscious children. Once airway patency has 
been established, the adequacy of 
breathing
 should be evaluated. 
Slow respiratory rates or cyanosis may signal impending respira
-
tory failure. If the airway is patent but the child’s respiratory effort 
is inadequate, positive pressure ventilation via bag- valve- mask 
support should be initiated. Oxygen should be administered to all 
seriously ill or hypoxic children via nasal cannula or face mask. 
Auscultation of the lung fields should assess for air entry, symmetry 
of breath sounds, and presence of adventitious breath sounds such 
as crackles or wheezes. Bronchodilator therapy can be initiated to 
alleviate bronchospasm. Racemic epinephrine is indicated for stri
-
dor at rest in a patient with upper airway obstruction (e.g., croup). 
Once airway and breathing have been addressed, 
circulation
 must 
be evaluated. Symptoms of 
shock
 include tachycardia, cool extremi
-
ties, delayed capillary refill time, mottled or pale skin, and effortless 
tachypnea. In children, hypotension is a late finding in shock and 
indicates that significant decompensation has already taken place. 
Vascular access is necessary for volume resuscitation in patients 
with impaired circulation, and an intraosseous line should be con
-
sidered early if there is any difficulty in obtaining vascular access 
for a patient requiring resuscitation. Each time an intervention is 
performed, the clinician should 
reassess the patient
 to determine 
whether interventions have been successful and whether additional 
care is needed.
 
DISPOSITION
Most children evaluated for acute illness in the office or urgent care 
setting can be managed on an 
outpatient
 basis. These patients should 
have a reassuring physical examination, stable vital signs, and an ade
-
quate follow- up plan before being sent home. A mildly dehydrated 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

552 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
patient can be discharged home for a trial of oral rehydration. Patients 
with respiratory illness who exhibit signs of mild respiratory distress 
may be monitored at home, with a repeat examination scheduled the 
next day. Depending on the child’s condition, the comfort of the par
-
ents, and the relationship of the family with the physician, telephone 
follow- up may be all that is necessary. When no specific diagnosis 
has been established at the first outpatient visit, a follow- up examina
-
tion may yield the diagnosis and can provide reassurance for both the 
caregiver and the practitioner that a child’s severity of illness has not 
progressed.
However, if it is deemed that the child needs a higher level of care, 
it is the pediatrician’s responsibility to decide what method of transfer 
is appropriate. Physicians may be reluctant to call for help because of 
a misperception that emergency 911 services should be activated only 
for ongoing resuscitation. Emergency medical services (EMS) trans
-
port should be initiated for any child who is physiologically unstable 
(e.g., with severe respiratory distress, hypoxia, signs of shock, or altered 
mental state). If the family’s ability to adhere promptly to a recommen
-
dation for ED evaluation is in question, this patient also should be 
transported by EMS. Some physicians and families may defer calling 
EMS because of the perception that a parent can reach the hospital 
faster by private motor vehicle. Although rapidity of transport should 
be considered, the need for further interventions during transport and 
the risk of clinical decompensation are other important factors in the 
decision to activate EMS. Ultimately, the legal responsibility for choos
-
ing an appropriate level of transport for a patient lies with the referring 
physician until responsibility of care is officially transferred to another 
medical provider.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Children in the community and those in the hospital are at risk for a 
variety of injuries and life- threatening disease processes that lead to 
cardiac or respiratory compromise, which require prompt evaluation 
and intervention.
ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION OF CHILDREN 
WITH CARDIORESPIRATORY EMERGENCIES
The first response to a pediatric emergency of any cause is a rapid and 
systematic 
general assessment
 of the scene and the child to iden
-
tify immediate threats to the child, care providers, and others. If an 
emergency is identified, the emergency response system (emergency 
medical services [EMS]) should be activated immediately. Care pro
-
viders should then proceed through 
primary
, 
secondary
, and 
tertiary
 
assessments as allowed by the child’s condition, safety of the scene, and 
resources available. This standardized approach organizes what might 
otherwise be a confusing or chaotic situation and ensures that key ele
-
ments of assessment and treatment are not omitted. If at any point dur
-
ing these assessments the provider identifies a life- threatening problem, 
progression through the systematic assessment is paused and targeted 
lifesaving interventions are prioritized. Further assessments and inter
-
ventions should be delayed until other providers arrive to assist or until 
the life- threatening condition is successfully treated or stabilized.
Chapter 
79
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory 
 
Emergencies and 
Resuscitation
Ryan W. Morgan and Alexis A. Topjian
General Assessment
Upon arrival at the scene of a critically ill or injured child or upon 
the child’s presentation for medical care, a provider’s first task is a 
quick survey of the scene itself. Is the rescuer or child in imminent 
danger because of circumstances at the scene (e.g., fire, high- voltage 
electricity)? If so, can the child be safely extricated to a safe location 
for assessment and treatment? Can the child be safely moved with the 
appropriate precautions (e.g., cervical spine protection) if indicated? A 
rescuer is expected to proceed only if these important safety conditions 
have been met so that they do not jeopardize their own safety.
Once the provider’s and child’s safety have been ensured, the 
provider performs a rapid 
visual survey
 of the child, assessing the 
child’s 
general appearance
 and 
cardiopulmonary function
. This 
action should only take a few seconds and includes assessment of (1) 
general appearance, determining color, tone, alertness, and respon
-
siveness; (2) adequacy of breathing, distinguishing between normal, 
comfortable respirations versus respiratory distress or apnea; and (3) 
adequacy of circulation, identifying cyanosis, pallor, or mottling. If 
a child is found unresponsive or becomes unresponsive during the 
provider’s assessment, the provider should stimulate the patient and 
assess the patient’s response to voice. If there is no response, the pro
-
vider should assess for breathing. If the child is breathing but ineffec
-
tively, rescue breathing should be started. If the child is not breathing 
or has agonal respirations, the provider should initiate cardiopulmo
-
nary resuscitation (CPR) and follow Basic Life Support (BLS) pediat
-
ric cardiac arrest algorithms for one rescuer or two or more rescuers 
(
Figs. 79.1 and 79.2
).
 
Primary Assessment
Once the emergency response system has been activated and the child 
is determined not to require CPR, the provider should proceed with 
a primary assessment that includes a brief, hands- on evaluation of 
cardiopulmonary and neurologic function. This assessment includes 
a limited physical examination, evaluation of vital signs, and measure
-
ment of pulse oximetry if available. The American Heart Association 
(AHA), in its Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) curriculum, 
supports the structured format of 
airway, breathing, circulation, 
disability, exposure (ABCDE)
. 
The goal of the primary assessment is 
to obtain a focused, systems- based assessment of the child’s injuries or 
abnormalities so that resuscitative efforts can be rapidly targeted to these 
areas;
 if the provider identifies a life- threatening abnormality, further 
evaluation is postponed until appropriate corrective action has been 
taken.
The exam and vital sign data can be interpreted only if the provider 
has a thorough understanding of normal values. In pediatrics, nor
-
mal respiratory rate, heart rate, and blood pressure have age- specific 
norms (
Table	79.1
). These ranges can be difficult to remember, espe
-
cially if used infrequently, and providers should therefore maintain 
ready access to these normal ranges. Hypotension is defined as blood 
pressure less than the fifth percentile for age. This is considered a sys
-
tolic blood pressure of <60 mm Hg for neonates up to 28 days, <70 
mm Hg for infants from 1 month to 1 year, <70+ (age in years ×2) 
mm Hg for children 1- 10 years, and <90 mm Hg for children older 
than 10 years of age.
Airway and Breathing
The most common precipitating event for cardiac instability in infants 
and children is respiratory failure (the inability to adequately oxygenate or 
ventilate). Therefore 
rapid assessment for respiratory failure and imme
-
diate restoration of adequate ventilation and oxygenation remain the first 
priorities in the resuscitation of a child
. Using a systematic approach, 
the provider should first assess whether the child’s airway is patent and 
maintainable. A 
patent
 airway is unobstructed, allowing normal res
-
piration without noise or effort. A 
maintainable
 airway is one that is 
either already patent or can be made patent with a simple maneuver. 
To	assess	airway	patency,	the	provider	should	look	for	breathing	move
-
ments in the child’s chest and abdomen, listen for breath sounds, and 
feel for the movement of air at the child’s mouth and nose. Abnormal 
breathing sounds (e.g., snoring or stridor), increased work of breathing, 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79
 u 
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory  Emergencies and Resuscitation 
553
Pediatric BLS for healthcare providers—single rescuer
Verify scene safety.
• Check for responsiveness.• Shout for nearby help.
• Activate the emergency response system
  via mobile device (if appropriate).Normalbreathing,pulse feltNo normalbreathing,pulse feltMonitor untilemergencyresponders arrive.Look for no breathingor only gasping and checkpulse (simultaneously).Is pulse definitely feltwithin 10 seconds?• Provide rescue breathing,  1 breath every 2–3 seconds,
  or about 20–30 breaths/min.• Assess pulse rate for no
  more than 10 seconds.YesYesHR <60/minwith signs of poorperfusion?NoNoNo breathingor only gasping,pulse not feltStart CPR.Witnessedsudden collapse?• Continue rescue  breathing; check
  pulse every
  2 minutes.
• If no pulse, start
  CPR.Activate emergency responsesystem (if not already done),and retrieve AED/defibrillator.• 1 rescuer: Perform cycles of  30 compressions and 2 breaths.
• When second rescuer arrives,
  perform cycles of 15 compressions  and 2 breaths.
• Use AED as soon as it is available.Start CPRAfter about 2 minutes, if still alone, activateemergency response system and retrieve AED(if not already done).Check rhythm.Shockable rhythm?Yes,shockableNo,nonshockable• Give 1 shock. Resume CPR  immediately for 2 minutes
  (until prompted by AED to allow  rhythm check).
• Continue until ALS providers take
  over or the child starts to move.• Resume CPR immediately for
  2 minutes (until prompted by AED
  to allow rhythm check).
• Continue until ALS providers take
  over or the child starts to move.
rbru
 Basic Life Support (BLS) algorithm for healthcare providers: Pediatric cardiac arrest algorithm for the single rescuer—2020 update. AED, 
Automated external defibrillator; ALS, advanced life support; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation. (
From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, et al. 
Part 4: Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life Support: 2020 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency 
Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2020;142[16 Suppl 2]:S469- S523.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

554 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
and apnea are all findings potentially consistent with airway obstruc
-
tion. If there is evidence of obstruction, the provider should start with 
repositioning and “head- tilt, chin- lift” if neck injury is not suspected or 
a jaw thrust if neck injury is a concern (
Fig. 79.3
). Suctioning of the air
-
way or placement of adjunct airway devices such as a nasopharyngeal 
airway should be considered based on the exam findings and the likely 
etiologies of airway obstruction. Maneuvers to relieve the obstruction 
should be instituted before the provider proceeds to evaluate the child’s 
breathing.
Assessment of breathing includes evaluation of the child’s respi
-
ratory rate, respiratory effort, breath sounds, and peripheral oxygen 
saturation via pulse oximetry. Normal breathing appears comfortable, 
is quiet, and occurs at an age- appropriate rate. Abnormal respiratory 
rates include apnea and rates that are either abnormally slow (brad
-
ypnea) or fast (tachypnea). 
Bradypnea and irregular respiratory pat
-
terns (such as gasping or agonal respirations) require urgent attention 
because they are often signs of impending respiratory failure, apnea, or 
cardiorespiratory arrest.
 Signs of increased respiratory effort include 
nasal flaring, grunting, chest or neck muscle retractions, head bob
-
bing, and seesaw respirations. Hypoxemia, measured by pulse oxim
-
etry, often accompanies parenchymal lung disease, apnea, or airway 
obstruction. However, providers should keep in mind that adequate 
perfusion is required to produce a reliable peripheral oxygen satura
-
tion measurement. Central cyanosis is a sign of severe hypoxemia 
and indicates an emergent need for oxygen supplementation and 
respiratory support.
 
• Continue rescue  breathing; check  pulse about
  every 2 minutes.
• If no pulse, start
  CPR.
YesHR <60/minwith signs of poorperfusion?NoStart CPR.Start CPRVerify scene safety.
Pediatric BLS healthcare providers—2 or more rescuers
• Check for responsiveness.• Shout for nearby help.
• First rescuer remains with the child.  Second rescuer activates emergency
  response system and retrieves the
  AED and emergency equipment.Normalbreathing,pulse feltNo normalbreathing,pulse feltMonitor untilemergencyresponders arrive.Look for no breathingor only gasping and checkpulse (simultaneously).Is pulse definitely feltwithin 10 seconds?• Provide rescue breathing,  1 breath every 2–3 seconds,
  or about 20–30 breaths/min.• Assess pulse rate for no
  more than 10 seconds.No breathingor only gasping,pulse not felt• First rescuer performs cycles of
  30 compressions and 2 breaths.
• When second rescuer returns,
  perform cycles of 15 compressions  and 2 breaths.
• Use AED as soon as it is available.Check rhythm.Shockable rhythm?Yes,shockableNo,nonshockable• Give 1 shock. Resume CPR  immediately for 2 minutes
  (until prompted by AED to allow  rhythm check).
• Continue until ALS providers take
  over or the child starts to move.• Resume CPR immediately for
  2 minutes (until prompted by AED
  to allow rhythm check).
• Continue until ALS providers take
  over or the child starts to move.
Fig. 79.2
 Basic Life Support (BLS) algorithm for healthcare providers: Pediatric cardiac arrest algorithm for two or more rescuers—2020 update. 
AED, Automated external defibrillator; ALS, advanced life support; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation. (
From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, 
et al. Part 4: Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life Support: 2020 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emer
-
gency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2020;142[16 Suppl 2]:S469- S523.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79
 u 
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory  Emergencies and Resuscitation 
555
Circulation
Cardiovascular function is assessed by evaluation of skin color 
and temperature, heart rate, heart rhythm, presence and quality of 
pulses, capillary refill time, and blood pressure. In nonhospital set
-
tings, much of this important information can be obtained without 
measuring the blood pressure; lack of blood pressure data should 
not prevent the provider from determining adequacy of circulation 
or implementing lifesaving support. Mottling, pallor, delayed capil
-
lary refill, cyanosis, weak pulses, and cool extremities are all signs of 
diminished perfusion and compromised cardiac output. 
Tachycardia
 
is the earliest and most common sign of shock but lacks both sensi
-
tivity and specificity and should be correlated with other components 
of the exam, such as weakness, threadiness, or absence of pulses. An 
age- specific approach to heart rate assessment will yield the most reli
-
able interpretation. 
Bradycardia
 can be normal in athletic children 
but should be assessed in the context of the child’s perfusion, blood 
pressure, mental status, and oxygen saturation, as it can be a sign of 
impending cardiac arrest.
 

In the setting of a pediatric emergency, 
disability
 refers to a child’s 
neurologic function in terms of the level of consciousness and cortical 
function. Standard evaluation of a child’s neurologic condition can be 
done quickly with an assessment of pupillary response to light (if one 
is available) and use of either of the standard scores used in children: 
the Alert, Verbal, Pain, Unresponsive (AVPU) Pediatric Response 
Scale and the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (
Tables	79.2	and	79.3
). The 
able 79.1 
 
 Normal Vital Signs According to Age
AGE
HEART RATE 
(beats/min)
BLOOD 
 
PRESSURE
†
 
(
mm Hg
)
RESPIRATORY 
RATE
+
 
 
(breaths/min)
Premature
120- 205
*
60- 76/31- 45
40- 70
Neonate
100- 205
*
67- 84/35- 53
35- 55
Infant
100- 180
72- 104/37- 56
30- 53
Toddler
98- 140
86- 106/42- 63
22- 37
Preschooler
80- 120
89- 112/46- 72
20- 29
School- age child
75- 118
97- 120/57- 80
18- 25
Adolescent
60- 100
110- 131/64- 83
12- 20
*In sleep, heart rates may be significantly lower, but if perfusion is maintained, no 
intervention is required.
†
A blood pressure cuff should cover approximately two- thirds of the arm; too small a 
cuff yields spuriously high pressure readings, and too large a cuff yields spuriously 
low pressure readings. Values are systolic/diastolic and assume 50th percentile for 
height for children 1 year and older.
+
The respiratory rate is expected to increase in the presence of fever and stress.
‡Approximately equal to postconception age in weeks (may add 5 mm Hg).
Modified from Hazinski MF. Children are different. In Hazinski MF, ed. 
Nursing Care of 
the Critically Ill Child,
 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2013:1- 18.
Fig. 79.3
 Opening the airway with the head- tilt/chin- lift maneuver. 
One hand is used to tilt the head, extending the neck. The index fin
-
ger of the rescuer’s other hand lifts the mandible outward by lifting 
the chin.
Table 79.2 
 
 AVPU Neurologic Assessment
A
The child is awake, alert, and appropriately responsive 
to caregivers and stimuli.
V
The child responds only to voice such as calling the 
child’s name or speaking loudly.
P
The child responds only to painful stimuli, such as sternal 
rub or pinching the trapezius.
U
The child is unresponsive to all stimuli.
A, Alert; V, verbal; P, pain; U, unresponsive.
From Ralston M, Hazinski MF, Zaritsky AL, et al., eds. 
Pediatric Advanced Life 
Support Course Guide and PALS Provider Manual
. Dallas: American Heart 
Association; 2007.
Table 79.3 
 
 Modified Pediatric Glasgow Coma Scale
≥
2 YEARS
<2 YEARS
EYE OPENING
Spontaneous
4
Spontaneous
4
To sound
3
To sound
3
To pressure
2
To pressure
2
None
1
None
1
VERBAL RESPONSE
Oriented; words/phrases 
normal for chronological 
age
5
Babbles, coos; words/
phrases normal for 
chronological age
5
Confused; some words/
phrases not normal for 
chronological age
4
Some words/phrases not 
normal for chronological 
age
4
Words
3
Inconsolable crying
3
Sounds
2
Sounds
2
None
1
None
1
MOTOR RESPONSE
Obeys commands
6
Normal spontaneous 
movement
6
Localizes pain
5
Rapidly withdraws 
 
extremity to stimulation
5
Normal flexion
4
Normal flexion
4
Abnormal flexion
3
Abnormal flexion
3
Extension
2
Extension
2
None
1
None
1
Adapted from Kirschen MP, Snyder M, Smith K, et al. Inter- rater reliability between 
critical care nurses performing a pediatric modification to the Glasgow Coma Scale. 
Pediatr Crit Care Med
. 2019;20(7):660- 666.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

556 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
causes of decreased level of consciousness in children are numerous 
and include conditions as diverse as respiratory failure with hypoxia 
or hypercarbia, hypoglycemia, poisonings or drug overdose, trauma, 
seizures, infection, and shock. 
Most often, an acutely ill or injured child 
has an altered level of consciousness because of respiratory compromise, 
circulatory compromise, or both.
 Any child with a depressed level of 
consciousness should be immediately assessed for abnormalities in 
cardiorespiratory status.
Alert, Verbal, Pain, Unresponsive (AVPU) Pediatric Response 
Scale:
 The AVPU scoring system is used to determine a child’s level of 
consciousness and cerebral cortex function (see 
Table	79.2
). Unlike the 
GCS,	the	AVPU	scale	is	not	developmentally	dependent—a	child	does	
not have to understand spoken language or follow commands, merely 
respond to a stimulus. The child is scored according to the amount of 
stimulus required to obtain a response, from 
alert
 (no stimulus; the 
child is already awake and interactive) to 
unresponsive
 (child does not 
respond to any stimulus).
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS):
 Although it has not been sys
-
tematically validated as a prognostic scoring system for infants 
and young children, the GCS is frequently employed to describe 
level of consciousness and neurologic status. It has value as a way 
to communicate mental status to other providers and when used 
serially	to	detect	improvement	or	deterioration.	The	GCS	has	three	
components: eyes, verbal, and motor. Individual scores for eye 
opening, verbal response, and motor response are added together, 
with a maximum of 15 points (see 
Table	79.3
).	There	are	numer
-
ous versions of the pediatric GCS, but most importantly, the pedi
-
atric GCS accounts for differences in development and the inability 
for children <2 years of age to follow commands and talk. Patients 
who have severe head injury with a GCS score 
≤
8 require aggressive 
management, generally including securement of the airway with 
endotracheal intubation and breathing with mechanical ventilation 
and, if indicated, placement of an intracranial pressure monitoring 
device.
The Full Outline of Unresponsiveness (FOUR) score
 is a neuro
-
logic assessment that incorporates brainstem reflex components and 
is associated with outcomes; it is commonly used in the intensive care 
unit	setting	(Table	82.1).
The pupillary response can give insight to causes of altered men
-
tal status. Pinpoint pupils can be due to many conditions, including 
narcotic ingestion, and dilated 
asymmetric
 pupils (anisocoria) can be 
caused by uncal herniation (
Table	79.4
 and 
Fig. 79.4
). If a patient has 
a normal mental status, other causes of pupillary dilation and asym
-
metry should be considered.
 
Exposure
Exposure is the final component of the pediatric primary assess
-
ment. This component of the exam is reached only after the child’s 
airway, breathing, circulation, and disability have been assessed and 
reasonably stabilized. In this setting, 
exposure
 stands for the dual 
responsibility of the provider both to expose the child to assess for 
previously unidentified injures and to consider prolonged exposure 
in a cold environment as a possible cause of hypothermia and car
-
diopulmonary instability. The provider should undress the child (as 
is feasible and reasonable) to perform a physical exam, assessing for 
burns, bruising, bleeding, joint laxity, and fractures. If possible, the 
provider should assess the child’s temperature. All maneuvers should 
be performed with careful maintenance of cervical spine precautions 
when indicated.
 
Secondary and Tertiary Assessment
Secondary Assessment
For healthcare providers in community or outpatient settings, transfer 
of care of a child to emergency or hospital personnel may occur before 
a full secondary assessment is possible. However, before the child is 
removed from the scene and separated from witnesses or family, a brief 
history should be obtained for medical providers at the accepting facil
-
ity. The components of a secondary assessment include a 
focused his
-
tory
 and 
focused physical examination
.
The history should be targeted to information that could explain 
cardiorespiratory or neurologic dysfunction and should take the 
form of a 
SAMPLE history
: signs/symptoms; allergies; medications; 
past medical history; timing of last meal; and events leading to this 
situation. Medical personnel not engaged in resuscitative efforts can 
be dispatched to elicit history from witnesses or relatives. The physical 
examination during the secondary assessment is a thorough head- to- 
toe exam, although the severity of the child’s illness or injury could 
necessitate curtailing portions of the exam or postponing nonessential 
elements until a later time.
 
Tertiary Assessment
The tertiary assessment occurs in a hospital setting, where ancillary 
laboratory and radiographic assessments contribute to a thorough 
understanding of the child’s condition. A basic blood chemistry pro
-
file, complete blood count, liver function tests, coagulation studies, and 
arterial blood gas analyses provide estimates of renal function, acid- 
base balance, cardiorespiratory function, and presence or absence of 
shock. Chest radiographs can be useful to evaluate both the heart and 
Table 79.4 
 
 Pupillary Responses
DILATED (MYDRIASIS)
PINPOINT (MIOSIS)
Bilateral
Anticholinergic agents (systemic, 
topical)
Sympathomimetic agents
Serotonin syndrome
Botulism
Brain death (fixed, nonreactive 
usually midposition)
Bilateral
Opiates
Organophosphates
Barbiturates
Pontine lesions
Unilateral
Third nerve compression with 
 
uncal herniation
Unilateral
Horner syndrome
Fig. 79.4
 Pupils in comatose patients. (
From Balcer LJ: Pupillary dis
-
orders. In Liu G, Volpe L, Galetta S (eds): Liu, Volpe, and Galetta’s Neu
-
ro-Ophthalmology: Diagnosis and Management, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier, 2018. Fig 13.32.
)
Small but reactiveIpsilateral “blown,”unreactive pupil, 
ptosisMidposition andunreactive to lightDilated andunreactivePinpoint butreactiveMidposition to large,unreactiveNormalLesion/processassociated with comaPupilsCommentMetabolicBilateralhypothalamicUncal herniationTectalMidbrainPontineBrain death
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79
 u 
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory  Emergencies and Resuscitation 
557
lungs, although more detailed assessment of cardiac function can be 
performed with echocardiography.
 
RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT OF RESPIRATORY 
DISTRESS AND FAILURE
The goals of initial management of respiratory distress or failure are 
to rapidly stabilize the child’s airway and breathing and to identify the 
cause of the problem so that further therapeutic efforts can be appro
-
priately directed.
Airway Obstruction Due to Foreign Body
Children under 5 years of age are particularly susceptible to foreign 
body aspiration and choking. Liquids are the most common cause of 
choking in infants, whereas small objects and food (e.g., grapes, nuts, 
hot dogs, candy) are the most common source of foreign bodies in the 
airways of toddlers and older children. A history consistent with for
-
eign body aspiration is considered diagnostic. Any child in the proper 
setting with the sudden onset of choking, stridor, or wheezing should 
be considered to have a foreign body aspiration until proven otherwise. 
Unfortunately, this classic history is not always present in all cases of 
foreign body aspiration.
Airway obstruction is treated with a sequential approach start
-
ing with the head- tilt/chin- lift maneuver to open and support the 
airway, followed by inspection for a foreign body, and finger- sweep 
clearance or suctioning if one is visualized. 
Blind suctioning or fin
-
ger sweeps of the mouth are not recommended.
 A conscious child 
suspected of having a partial foreign body obstruction should be 
permitted to cough spontaneously until coughing is no longer effec
-
tive, respiratory distress and stridor increase, or the child becomes 
unconscious.	They	can	be	allowed	to	find	a	comfortable	position	to	
facilitate air entry.
For 
conscious infants,
 providers should administer five back 
blows and then five chest thrusts (
Fig. 79.5
). After each cycle of 
back blows and chest thrusts, the child’s mouth should be visually 
inspected for the presence of the foreign body. If identified within 
finger’s reach, it should be removed with a gentle finger sweep. If 
no foreign body is visualized and the child is conscious, repeat back 
blows and chest thrusts. Do not blindly sweep for objects if they are 
not visible, as this can push the object farther into the airway.
For 
conscious children
 older than 1 year, providers should give a 
series of five abdominal thrusts 
(Heimlich maneuver)
 with the child 
standing or sitting (
Fig. 79.6
). After the abdominal thrusts, the airway 
is examined for a foreign body, which should be removed if visualized. 
If no foreign body is seen, abdominal thrusts should be repeated. For 
both infants and children, the sequence is repeated until the object is 
expelled or the patient loses consciousness, at which time CPR with 
ventilations should be initiated.
If the child becomes 
unconscious,
 the child should be gently 
placed on the ground in a supine position and ventilations should 
be initiated; compressions should also be started if the child is 
pulseless.	The	airway	should	be	inspected	for	a	foreign	body	at	the	
time of ventilations.
 
 
 Back blows 
(top)
 and chest thrusts 
(bottom)
 to relieve for
-
eign body airway obstruction in the infant.
Fig. 79.6
 Abdominal thrusts with the conscious victim standing or 
sitting.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

558 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Airway Obstruction or Narrowing from Other 
Causes
Airway obstruction can also be caused by airway narrowing in both the 
upper and lower airways. Upper airway obstruction refers to narrow
-
ing of the extrathoracic portion of the airway, including the orophar
-
ynx, larynx, epiglottitis, and trachea. In the upper airways, narrowing 
is most often caused by airway edema (e.g., croup or anaphylaxis) or 
epiglottic edema (e.g., epiglottitis) and often manifests with stridor. 
Stridor, in cases of extrathoracic airway obstruction, is a high- pitched 
sound heard on inspiration. When airway obstruction is intrathoracic, 
stridor can be biphasic, heard during both inspiration and expiration. 
Lower airway obstruction affects all intrathoracic airways, notably 
the bronchi and bronchioles. 
Bronchiolitis
 and acute 
asthma
 exac
-
erbations are the major causes of intrathoracic airway obstruction in 
children, causing lower airway narrowing through a combination of 
airway swelling, mucus production, and circumferential smooth mus
-
cle constriction of smaller airways.
The approach to upper airway obstruction is dictated by both the 
underlying condition and the clinical severity of the problem. In cases 
of mild upper airway obstruction, the child has minimally increased 
work of breathing (evidenced by tachypnea and absent to mild retrac
-
tions). Stridor, if present at all, should be audible with only coughing 
or activity. Children with these findings can often be supported with 
supplemental oxygen as needed. In cases with moderate obstruction, 
in which the child has more significant work of breathing or more 
pronounced stridor, nebulized 
racemic epinephrine
 and oral or intra
-
venous (IV) 
dexamethasone
 can be added, particularly for 
croup
 
(i.e., laryngotracheobronchitis) (see Chapter 434). 
Heliox
 (combined 
helium- oxygen therapy) administration may also be considered. Chil
-
dren with severe upper airway obstruction have marked intercostal 
retractions, prominent stridor, and decreased air entry on auscultation 
of the lung fields. They can also be hypoxemic, dyspneic, and either 
agitated or somnolent. A child in severe distress that does not rapidly 
respond to therapies may require endotracheal intubation to overcome 
the area of obstruction. Clinicians need to carefully observe patients, as 
impending respiratory failure may be initially confused with improve
-
ment. Stridor becomes quieter and retractions less prominent when 
a child’s respiratory effort begins to diminish. This can either be the 
result of improvement or progressive respiratory failure with less air 
entry. The child in respiratory failure may have poor air movement on 
auscultation and decreased level of consciousness from hypercarbia, 
hypoxia, or both. When 
anaphylaxis
 is suspected as the cause for upper 
airway edema, providers should administer an intramuscular dose of 
epinephrine as needed (see Chapter 190). Racemic epinephrine can 
also help decrease localized airway edema. 
Epiglottitis
 often presents 
with a muffled voice, drooling, and difficulty swallowing. Epiglottitis is 
a medical emergency for which the initial focus should be on alerting 
otolaryngology and/or anesthesiology experts to be immediately pres
-
ent while keeping the patient calm. These patients usually need to have 
their airway secured in an operating room with contingency planning 
for emergency surgical airway placement. No matter the cause, any 
child with upper airway obstruction and impending respiratory failure 
should be prepared to undergo endotracheal intubation and respira
-
tory support. Prompt notification of providers trained in advanced air
-
way management is essential.
In cases of lower airway obstruction, therapies are targeted to both 
relieve the obstruction and reduce the child’s work of breathing. For 
asthma, 
inhaled bronchodilators
, such as albuterol, augmented by 
oral or IV 
corticosteroids
, remain the mainstay of therapy in mild 
to moderate acute distress. Children with more significant obstruc
-
tion appear dyspneic, with tachypnea, retractions, forced expiration, 
and audible wheezing or reduced breath sounds. In these cases, the 
addition of an anticholinergic agent, such as nebulized ipratropium 
bromide, or a smooth muscle relaxant, such as magnesium sulfate, 
may provide further relief, although the evidence for these measures 
remains controversial (see Chapter 185). Supplemental oxygen and 
IV fluid hydration can be useful adjuncts. Infants and young chil
-
dren with bronchiolitis often present with tachypnea. Patients with 
moderate to severe disease may have retractions, nasal flaring, or 
grunting and can be hypoxemic. These patients often do not respond 
to bronchodilators. Supportive care with chest physiotherapy to sup
-
port mucous clearance and noninvasive positive pressure ventilation 
support can be used as these patients recover from this lower airway 
viral disease process.
Impending respiratory failure in children with lower airway obstruc
-
tion can be insidious. When diagnosed early in a school- age child who 
is cooperative, respiratory failure can potentially be averted through 
judicious use of noninvasive support, including heated, high- flow nasal 
cannula (HFNC) therapy, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), 
or bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP). Endotracheal intubation 
should be performed only by skilled providers, preferably in a hospital 
setting, because there is a high risk of cardiorespiratory compromise in 
patients with lower airway obstruction during the procedure.
 
Fig. 79.7
 Rescue breathing in an infant. The rescuer’s mouth covers 
the infant’s nose and mouth, creating a seal. One hand performs the 
head- tilt while the other hand lifts the infant’s jaw.
Fig. 79.8
 Rescue breathing in a child. The rescuer’s mouth covers the 
child’s mouth, creating a mouth- to- mouth seal. One hand maintains the 
head- tilt; the thumb and forefinger of the same hand are used to pinch 
the child’s nose. The other hand lifts the child’s jaw.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79
 u 
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory  Emergencies and Resuscitation 
559
Parenchymal Lung Disease
Parenchymal lung disease includes a heterogeneous list of conditions, 
such as pneumonia, pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(PARDS), pneumonitis, bronchiolitis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, 
cystic fibrosis, and pulmonary edema. The commonalities of these 
conditions are their effects on the small airways and alveoli, includ
-
ing inflammation and exudation leading to consolidation of lung tis
-
sue, decreased gas exchange, and increased work of breathing. Clinical 
management of these conditions includes specific treatment as indi
-
cated (e.g., antibiotics for bacterial pneumonia) and supportive care 
with oxygen, noninvasive respiratory support (e.g., HFNC, CPAP, or 
BiPAP), or invasive mechanical ventilation. The severity of work of 
breathing and degree of oxygenation or ventilation failure determine 
the degree of respiratory support needed and should be expected to 
evolve with time.
 
Airway and Breathing Management
Rescue Breathing
If a child is unconscious and not breathing effectively or apneic, 
rescue 
breathing
 should be provided. The provider should open the airway 
with the head- tilt/chin- lift maneuver and attempt mouth- to- mouth 
ventilation (
Figs. 79.7 and 79.8
). In trauma patients with suspected 
cervical spine injuries, a jaw thrust should be performed without the 
head- tilt maneuver. If ventilation is unsuccessful, the airway is reposi
-
tioned, and ventilation should be attempted again.
 
−  
Ventilation with a bag- mask apparatus can be as effective as endotra
-
cheal intubation and safer when the provider is inexperienced with 
intubation. Bag- mask ventilation (BMV) requires training to ensure 
that the provider is competent to select the correct mask size, open the 
child’s airway, form a tight seal between the mask and the child’s face, 
deliver effective ventilation, and assess the effectiveness of ventilations. 
An appropriately sized mask is one that fits over the child’s mouth and 
nose but does not extend below the chin or over the eyes. An adequate 
seal is best achieved through a combination “C- E” grip on the mask, 
in which the thumb and index finger form the letter “C” on top of the 
mask, holding the mask onto the child’s face, and the remaining three 
fingers form an “E” grip under the child’s mandible, holding the jaw 
forward without pressing on the soft tissues and extending the head 
up toward the mask. Using this method, the care provider can secure 
the mask to the child’s face with one hand and use the other hand to 
compress the ventilation bag (
Fig. 79.9
).
The provider may have to move the head and neck through a range 
of positions to find the one that best maintains airway patency with 
adequate chest rise. In infants and young children, optimal ventila
-
tion is often provided when the child’s head is in the neutral sniffing 
position without hyperextension of the head. Poor chest rise or per
-
sistent hypoxemia indicate inadequate ventilation. In this setting, the 
care provider should recheck the mask’s seal on the child’s face, repo
-
sition the child’s head, and consider suctioning the airway. If these 
maneuvers do not restore ventilation, the provider should consider 
placement of a nasopharyngeal or oral airway. The inability to venti
-
late a patient with positive pressure after the previous measures is an 
emergency requiring expert consultation while preparing for endo
-
tracheal intubation.
 
 
A child generally requires intubation when at least one of these condi
-
tions exists: (1) the child is unable to maintain airway patency or pro
-
tect against aspiration (as occurs in settings of neurologic compromise 
such as seizures or traumatic brain injury); (2) the child is failing to 
maintain adequate oxygenation despite supplemental oxygen or non
-
invasive therapies; (3) the child cannot be adequately ventilated with 
evidence of elevated blood carbon dioxide levels and an unsafe acid- 
base balance; (4) sedation and/or paralysis is required for a procedure; 
(5) the need to decrease metabolic demand by sedating the patient to 
support extrapulmonary organs (e.g., septic shock or heart failure) is 
present; and (6) providers anticipate a deteriorating course that will 
eventually lead to any of the first five conditions. It should be noted 
that in centers experienced in noninvasive respiratory support, a trial 
of HFNC, CPAP, or BiPAP may be indicated based on the specific clini
-
cal scenario.
There	are	few	
absolute contraindications
 to tracheal intubation, 
but experts generally agree that in settings of known complete 
airway obstruction (e.g., severe subglottic stenosis), endotra
-
cheal intubation should be avoided, and emergency cricothy
-
roidotomy or tracheostomy performed instead. It is important to 
assess a patient’s airway before initiating endotracheal intubation. 
Any history of a difficult airway (difficult to intubate) or criti
-
cal airway (unable to bag- mask ventilate) should prompt further 
investigation and expert consultation. Both history and physi
-
cal exam features such as limited mouth opening, limited neck 
mobility, or micrognathia should raise concern for further assess
-
ment. Another important consideration is to ensure that providers 
maintain appropriate cervical spine (C- spine) protection dur
-
ing the intubation procedure when neck or spinal cord injury is 
suspected.
A critical phase of the intubation procedure is the preprocedural 
preparation, when the provider ensures all the equipment and staff 
needed for safe intubation are present and functioning. An easy 
pneumonic for this is 
SOAP MM
: 
suction
 (Yankauer suction cath
-
eter attached to wall suction); 
oxygen
 (both preoxygenation of the 
patient and devices needed to deliver oxygen, such as a bag- mask); 
airway
 (appropriately sized endotracheal tube and laryngoscope 
as well as adjunct airway devices); 
people
 (all those needed during 
and immediately after the procedure, including respiratory thera
-
pists and nurses); 
monitor
 (pulse oximetry, ECG, blood pressure, 
capnography); and 
medications
 (sedation and often neuromuscular 
blockade to facilitate intubation). A simple formula for selecting the 
appropriately	sized	endotracheal	tube	(ETT)	is:
UncuffedETTsize
(inmm)=
(ageinyears
4)
+
4
Cuffed	ETTs	should	generally	be	0.5	mm	smaller.	Providers	should	
always	have	a	range	of	ETTs	available,	given	the	heterogeneity	of	
patients	and	airway	size.	The	use	of	cuffed	ETTs	is	recommended	
in	most	pediatric	populations,	as	it	may	decrease	the	need	for	ETT	
changes caused by difficulty ventilating and may decrease the risk of 
aspiration.
Fig. 79.9
 “C- E” grip to secure a mask to a child’s face with appropri
-
ate seal.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

560 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Analgesia is recommended to reduce metabolic stress, discomfort, 
and anxiety during intubation. Pretreatment with a sedative, an anal
-
gesic, or an anesthetic or dissociative medication and potentially a neu
-
romuscular relaxing agent (paralytic agent) is recommended unless the 
situation is emergent (e.g., cardiac arrest) and the administration of 
drugs would cause an unacceptable delay. Neuromuscular blocking 
agents should generally be avoided in patients who cannot be bag- 
mask ventilated because if the patient cannot be successfully intubated 
and cannot be bag- mask ventilated, they may progress to cardiopul
-
monary arrest.
Because many intubations in critically ill children are emergency 
procedures, providers should be prepared to rapidly intubate (
Fig. 
79.10
).	Rapid	sequence	intubation	(RSI)—the	process	of	intubating	
with a sedative (etomidate, ketamine, propofol) and neuromuscular 
blockade (rocuronium, succinylcholine) preintubation medications 
(order	of	administration	not	important)—is	not	always	feasible	in	
critically patients because BMV is necessary to maintain oxygenation 
and ventilation due to severe lung disease or intracranial hyperten
-
sion. The routine use of cricoid pressure is not recommended because 
it does not decrease the risk of regurgitation of stomach contents, and 
it can impede effective BMV and airway visualization. Although there 
is a risk of regurgitation and aspiration, supporting the patient during 
induction and supporting rapid intubation is critical to minimize the 
risk to the patient.
Once	the	patient	is	intubated,	proper	ETT	placement	should	be	
assessed by auscultation of breath sounds, observation of symmet
-
ric chest rise, and analysis of exhaled carbon dioxide (CO
2
) by a 
colorimetric device or a capnographic device that quantifies CO
2
 elimi
-
nation. Chest radiography should be obtained to confirm appropriate 
tube	position.	Clinicians	should	assess	ETT	cuff	pressures	to	minimize	
the risk of airway trauma.
 
RECOGNITION AND MANAGEMENT OF SHOCK
Shock occurs when oxygen and nutrient delivery to the tissues is inad
-
equate to meet metabolic demands (see 
Chapter 85
). A diagnosis of 
shock does not require the presence of hypotension. It is important for 
providers to recognize that 
shock can occur with hypertension, nor
-
motension, or hypotension
. In early 
compensated
 shock, blood pres
-
sure is maintained, and oxygen delivery is mostly preserved through 
compensatory mechanisms such as tachycardia, increased systemic 
vascular resistance, or increased cardiac contractility. When compen
-
satory mechanisms fail or are inadequate, the patient progresses to 
decompensated
 shock, which is defined by hypotension and organ dys
-
function. If shock is not rapidly identified and treated, it can progress 
to multisystem organ dysfunction, cardiac arrest, and death.
Shock is also often described according to the underlying patho
-
physiology, which dictates the appropriate therapeutic response. 
Hypovolemic shock
 is the most common type of shock in children 
worldwide, usually related to fluid losses from severe diarrhea. Hem
-
orrhagic shock is a specific type of hypovolemic shock after trauma 
or other causes of bleeding. 
Distributive shock
 occurs because of 
pathogenic dilation of the body’s blood vessels and is often accompa
-
nied by relative intravascular hypovolemia due to capillary leak and 
“third- spacing” of intravascular fluids into the extravascular com
-
partment. The most common causes of distributive shock are sep
-
sis, anaphylaxis, and burn injuries, in which release of inflammatory 
cytokines causes massive capillary leak of fluid and proteins, lead
-
ing to low oncotic pressure and intravascular volume. In the setting 
of myocardial dysfunction, a child has tissue hypoperfusion from 
cardiogenic shock
. Common causes of cardiogenic shock are myo
-
carditis, cardiomyopathy, and congenital heart disease, often in the 
postoperative setting. Severe sepsis and septic shock are often accom
-
panied by myocardial dysfunction, and children with septic shock 
thus frequently manifest components of hypovolemic, distributive, 
and cardiogenic shock. 
Obstructive shock
 occurs when cardiac out
-
put is lowered by obstruction of blood flow to the body, as occurs 
with pericardial tamponade, tension pneumothorax, or massive 
pulmonary embolism. 
Dissociative shock
 manifests with normal 
cardiac and volume status but poor oxygen delivery due to severe 
anemia and carbon monoxide or cyanide poisoning.
The	evaluation	of	a	child	in	shock	should	proceed	based	on	the	
primary, secondary, and tertiary assessments. Initial resuscitation 
should include the administration of crystalloid fluids in 10- 20 mL/kg 
aliquots up to 60 mL/kg in the first hour if hypotension is present 
while paying close attention for signs of volume overload. If shock 
persists, volume overload is evident, or myocardial dysfunction is 
suspected, vasoactive infusions (e.g., epinephrine, norepinephrine) 
should be initiated. In hospital settings, catecholamine- dependent 
shock should trigger providers to consider placing a central venous 
catheter for stable venous access and an arterial line for continuous 
blood pressure monitoring. Laboratory assessment should include 
studies of renal and liver function; acid- base balance, including the 
presence of lactic acidosis, hypoxemia, and/or hypercapnia; and evi
-
dence of coagulopathy or disseminated intravascular coagulation to 
assess for signs of end- organ dysfunction and response to treatment. 
Assessment of peripheral perfusion, mental status, and urine output 
are	also	important	to	monitor.	Treatment	of	the	various	etiologies	of	
shock is noted in 
Chapter 85
.
 
RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT OF 
ARRHYTHMIAS
In the advanced life support setting, arrhythmias are most usefully 
classified according to the observed heart rate (i.e., bradycardia or 
tachycardia) and the presence of cardiopulmonary compromise (e.g., 
altered mental status, hypotension, signs of shock). If the primary sur
-
vey identifies a child with an abnormal heart rate and altered mental 
Base of tongueEpiglottisVocalcordsLevel ofT2 vertebralbodyCarinaABCDE
Fig. 79.10
 
A- E
,
 Tracheal intubation technique. (
From Fleisher G, Lud
-
wig S. Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Baltimore: Williams 
& Wilkins;1983:1250.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79
 u 
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory  Emergencies and Resuscitation 
561
status or other signs of shock or hypotension, the rhythm is inadequate 
no matter its rate.
Bradyarrhythmias
By definition, a child is 
bradycardic
 when the heart rate is slower than 
the normal range for age (see 
Table	79.1
). Sinus bradycardia can be 
a harmless incidental finding in an otherwise healthy person and is 
not usually associated with cardiac compromise. A clinically significant 
bradycardia occurs when the heart rate is slow and there are signs of 
systemic hypoperfusion (i.e., pallor, altered mental status, hypotension, 
acidosis). Symptomatic bradycardia occurs most often in the setting 
of hypoxemia but can also be caused by hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, 
other electrolyte abnormalities, hypothermia, heart block, and intra
-
cranial hypertension. Bradyarrhythmias are often the most common 
prearrest
 rhythms in young children.
Initial management of symptomatic bradycardia includes support 
or opening of the airway and confirming or establishing adequate 
oxygenation and ventilation (
Fig. 79.11
). After adequate oxygen
-
ation and ventilation have been confirmed, the child should be 
reassessed for continued bradycardia and poor perfusion. If cardiac 
Fig. 79.11
 Pediatric advanced life support: Bradycar
-
dia with a pulse algorithm. ABCs, Airway, breathing, and 
circulation; AV, atrioventricular (conductor); ECG, elec
-
trocardiogram; HR, heart rate; IO/IV, intraosseous/intra
-
venous. (
From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, et al. 
Part 4: Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life Support: 2020 
American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopul
-
monary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular 
Care. Circulation. 2020;142[16 Suppl 2]:S469- S523.
)
Patient with bradycardia
• Acutely altered  mental status• Signs of shock
• HypotensionCardiopulmonarycompromise?Assessment and support• Maintain patent airway
• Assist breathing with positive
  pressure ventilation and oxygen
  as necessary
• Cardiac monitor to identify rhythm;
  monitor pulse, BP, and oximetryStart CPR if HR <60/mindespite oxygenation andventilation.Bradycardiapersists?NoNoNoYesYesYes• Continue CPR if HR <60/min• IV/IO access
• Epinephrine• Atropine for increased vagal tone or primary AV block• Consider transthoracic/transvenous
 pacing• Identify and treat underlying causesCheck pulseevery 2 minutes.Pulse present?Go to pediatriccardiac arrest algorithm.• Support ABCs
• Consider oxygen
• Observe
• 12-lead ECG• Identify and treat  underlying causes
Doses/detailsEpinephrine IV/IO dose:0.01 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the0.1 mg/mL concentration).Repeat every 3–5 minutes.
If IV/IO access not available
but endotracheal (ET) tube
in place, may give ET dose:0.1 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the1 mg/mL concentration).Atropine IV/IO dose:0.02 mg/kg. May repeat once.Minimum dose 0.1 mg andmaximum single dose 0.5 mg.Possible causes• Hypothermia• Hypoxia
• Medications
Pediatric bradycardia with a pulse
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

562 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
compromise was solely the result of respiratory insufficiency, sup
-
port of the child’s airway and breathing may have been sufficient 
to restore normal hemodynamics. If respiratory support does not 
quickly correct the perfusion abnormalities, further care is based 
on the quality of perfusion and degree of bradycardia. 
A heart 
rate <60 beats/min with cardiopulmonary compromise is an indica
-
tion to begin CPR,
 including the administration of epinephrine. If 
increased vagal tone or primary atrioventricular block is suspected, 
atropine can be administered. For cases of refractory bradycardia, 
cardiac pacing should be considered (see 
Fig. 79.11
).
 
Tachyarrhythmias
Tachyarrhythmias	represent	a	wide	variety	of	rhythm	disturbances	
of atrial and ventricular origin (see Chapter 484). Sinus tachycardia 
is a normal physiologic response to the body’s need for increased 
cardiac output or oxygen delivery, as occurs with fever, exercise, or 
stress. It can also occur in more pathologic states, such as hypovo
-
lemia, anemia, pain, anxiety, thyrotoxicosis, and shock. Non–sinus 
tachyarrhythmias that do not originate in the sinus node are often 
categorized as either 
narrow complex rhythms
 (i.e., originating in the 
atrium, such as supraventricular tachycardia or atrial flutter) or 
wide 
• Acutely altered  mental status• Signs of shock
• HypotensionDoses/details• Maintain patent airway; assist breathing as necessary
• Administer oxygen• Cardiac monitor to identify rhythm; monitor pulse,  blood pressure, and oximetry
• IV/IO access
• 12-lead ECG if availableInitial assessment and support
Evaluate rhythmwith 12-lead ECGor monitor.Cardiopulmonarycompromise?NoYesNarrow(lessequal0.09 sec)Narrow(lessequal0.09 sec)Wide(>0.09 sec)Wide(>0.09 sec)EvaluateQRS duration.EvaluateQRS duration.Probable supraventriculartachycardia• P waves absent/abnormal• RR interval not variable• Infant rate usually greaterequal220/min• Child rate usually greaterequal180/min• History of abrupt rate change• P waves absent/abnormal• RR interval not variable• Infant rate usually greaterequal220/min• Child rate usually greaterequal180/min• History of abrupt rate changePossible ventriculartachycardiaPossible ventriculartachycardiaIf rhythm is regular andQRS monomorphic,consider adenosine.Expert consultationis recommended.Considervagal maneuvers.If IV/IO accessis present, giveadenosine.Probable supraventriculartachycardiaSynchronizedcardioversionExpert consultationis advised beforeadditional drugtherapies.or• If IV/IO access is present,  give adenosine• If IV/IO access is not
  available, or if adenosine
  is ineffective, perform
  synchronized cardioversionProbable sinustachycardia if• P waves present/normal
• Variable RR interval
• Infant rate usually <220/min
• Child rate usually <180/minSearch forand treat cause.SynchronizedcardioversionBegin with 0.5–1 J/kg;if not effective, increase
to 2 J/kg. Sedate if
needed, but don’t delay
cardioversion.Drug therapyAdenosine IV/IO dose• First dose: 0.1 mg/kg  rapid bolus (maximum:
  6 mg)
• Second dose:
  0.2 mg/kg rapid bolus
  (maximum second
  dose: 12 mg)
Pediatric tachycardia with a pulse
Fig. 79.12
 Pediatric advanced life support: Tachycardia with a pulse algorithm. AV, Atrioventricular (conductor); ECG, electrocardiogram; HR, 
heart rate; IO/IV, intraosseous/intravenous. (
From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, et al. Part 4: Pediatric Basic and Advanced Life Support: 2020 
American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2020;142[16 Suppl 
2]:S469- S523.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79
 u 
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory  Emergencies and Resuscitation 
563
complex rhythms
 (i.e., rhythms of ventricular origin, such as ventric
-
ular tachycardia).
The initial management of tachycardia should include assessment 
for cardiopulmonary compromise (
Fig. 79.12
). If the patient has evi
-
dence of cardiopulmonary compromise (i.e., hypotension, altered 
mental status, or other signs of shock), further treatment is based on 
whether the QRS complex of the ECG is narrow (
≤
0.09 sec) or wide 
(>0.09 sec). For narrow complex tachycardia, providers must distin
-
guish between sinus tachycardia and supraventricular tachycardia 
(SVT).	In	
sinus tachycardia
, the history and onset are consistent with 
a known cause of tachycardia, such as fever or dehydration. Sinus 
tachycardia usually has some degree of rate variability, and p- waves 
are consistently present on the ECG and are of normal morphology 
and	axis.	Treatment	is	then	geared	toward	identifying	and	treating	
the cause of sinus tachycardia. In 
SVT
, onset is often abrupt with
-
out prodrome, and p- waves are absent or have a nonsinus ECG axis. 
When	SVT	is	associated	with	cardiopulmonary	compromise,	provid
-
ers should rapidly move to convert the child’s heart rhythm back to 
sinus rhythm. If the child already has IV access, adenosine should be 
administered (
Table	79.5
). Adenosine has an extremely short half- life, 
so administration through an IV close to the heart (e.g., upper extrem
-
ity) is best. Adenosine should be administered with a three- way stop
-
cock inline so that it can be given and immediately flushed into the 
circulation. If the child does not have IV access or adenosine does not 
successfully convert the heart rhythm back to sinus rhythm, then 
syn
-
chronized cardioversion
 (0.5- 1.0 joule [J]/kg
) should be performed. 
For wide- complex tachycardia (i.e., 
ventricular tachycardia [VT]
) 
with a pulse and evidence of cardiopulmonary compromise, synchro
-
nized cardioversion should be performed.
For patients with tachycardia without cardiopulmonary compro
-
mise, the rhythm assessment proceeds in the same fashion, but treat
-
ment	potentially	differs.	Vagal	maneuvers	can	be	considered	for	SVT	
in the stable patient, followed by administration of adenosine and 
obtaining expert consultation. Wide- complex tachyarrhythmias with
-
out cardiovascular compromise should also trigger expert consultation 
before administration of antiarrhythmic medications. If the rhythm is 
monomorphic, adenosine can be given, as some stable wide- complex 
tachycardias	are	SVT	with	aberrant	conduction	and	thus	have	a	wide	
QRS complex. Patients should be continually reassessed for develop
-
ment of cardiovascular compromise.
 
  
 
  Medications for Pediatric Resuscitation and Arrhythmias
MEDICATION
DOSE
REMARKS
Adenosine
0.1 mg/kg (max dose: 6 mg)
Repeat: 0.2 mg/kg (max dose: 12 mg)
Monitor ECG
Rapid IV/IO bolus with flush
Amiodarone
5 mg/kg IV/IO; repeat 5 mg/kg doses up to 
 
15 mg/kg
Max dose: 300 mg
Monitor ECG and blood pressure, as it can cause hypotension
Give over 20- 60 min (can give via IV push for patients in cardiac 
arrest)
Use caution when administering with other drugs that prolong 
QT interval (consider expert consultation)
Atropine
IV/IO: 0.02 mg/kg
Minimum dose: 0.1 mg for bradycardia treatment
Max dose:
	•	Child:	0.5	mg
	•	Adolescent:	1	mg
Repeat once if needed
ETT
*
 0.04- 0.06 mg/kg
Max dose: 2 mg
Higher doses may be used with organophosphate poisoning
ETT dosing only if no IV/IO access
Calcium chloride (10%)
Calcium gluconate
20 mg/kg IV/IO
50- 100 mg/kg
Max dose: 2 g
Administer slowly; fast push can cause heart block/asystole
Use only with documented hypocalcemia
Dextrose
0.5- 1 g/kg IV/IO
	•	D10W:	5-	10	mL/kg
	•	D25W:	2-	4	mL/kg
	•	D50W:	1-	2	mL/kg
Recheck serial blood sugars after administration, as hypoglycemia 
can recur
Epinephrine
IV/IO: 0.01 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the 0.1 mg/mL 
concentration)
Max dose: 1 mg
ETT
*
: 0.1 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the 1 mg/mL 
 
concentration)
Max dose: 2.5 mg
May repeat every 3- 5 min as needed
Only give via ETT if no IV/IO access
Lidocaine
IV/IO: 1 mg/kg bolus
Max dose: 100 mg
Infusion: 20- 50 μg/kg/min
ETT
*
: 2- 3 mg/kg
Repeat	bolus	dose	if	infusion	is	initiated	>15	min	after	initial	
bolus
Magnesium sulfate
25- 50 mg/kg IV/IO
Max dose: 2 g
Can cause hypotension
Administer over 10- 20 min; faster in torsades de pointes
Naloxone
IV/IO/IM/SQ: 0.1 mg/kg for full reversal
Max dose 2 mg
IN: 4 mg spray; may repeat q2- 3min
ETT
*
: 2- 3 times IV dose
Use lower doses in patients with opioid- induced respiratory 
depression from therapeutic opioid dosing (0.001- 0.005 mg/kg)
May need to redose every 2- 3 minutes, as half- life is shorter 
than most narcotics
ETT if IV/IO routine not available
Sodium bicarbonate
1 mEq/kg IV/IO
Administer slowly; ensure adequate ventilation
*Flush with 5 mL of normal saline and follow with 5 ventilations.
D5W, 5% Dextrose in water; IO, intraosseous; IV, intravenous; ETT, endotracheal tube; IM, intramuscular; IN, intranasal.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

564 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
CARDIAC ARREST AND CARDIOPULMONARY 
RESUSCITATION
Overview
Cardiac arrest occurs when the heart fails as an effective pump and 
blood flow ceases. Outwardly, the patient in cardiac arrest presents 
as unresponsive and apneic with no palpable pulse. Internally, the 
cessation of cardiac output and oxygen delivery causes progressive 
tissue ischemia and organ failure. If not rapidly reversed, cardiac 
arrest leads to progressive deterioration in brain, heart, and other 
organ function, such that resuscitation and recovery are no longer 
possible. Cardiac arrest outcomes in children have improved as a 
result of improvements in the recognition of deteriorating patients 
and delivery of high- quality CPR. Prehospital and hospital pro
-
viders should understand that pediatric cardiac arrest is an inter
-
venable process for which favorable outcomes are common. Early 
 
recognition and rapid treatment with high- quality CPR can be 
lifesaving.
 
Prevention of Cardiac Arrest
Out- of- hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) occurs due to a variety of 
causes, including sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), drowning, 
foreign body aspiration, poisoning or drug overdose, and trauma. 
Sudden cardiac arrest due to arrhythmias or cardiac disease do occur 
(usually in adolescents and those with preexisting congenital heart 
disease) and should be recognized and promptly treated, but most 
pediatric OHCAs have an underlying respiratory etiology. Preventive 
measures such as “back to sleep” for infants to lower the risk of SIDS 
(see Chapter 423), child supervision around bodies of water, and mini
-
mizing access to high- risk choking foods substantially decrease the 
incidence of cardiac arrest. Recognition of the child with respiratory 
distress or impending respiratory failure and delivery of appropriate 
care, as outlined earlier, is the most common and practical means of 
preventing pediatric OHCA.
In hospitalized children, cardiac arrest is most often the result of the 
progression or worsening of an underlying respiratory, cardiac, or neu
-
romuscular disease process. Most pediatric in- hospital cardiac arrests 
(IHCAs) occur in the setting of progressive respiratory failure or shock. 
Recognition of deteriorating patients, transfer to monitored settings 
(i.e., intensive care units), and institution of appropriate directed and 
supportive therapies are effective means of preventing IHCA or ensur
-
ing that if it does occur, care is delivered in a well- equipped and pre
-
pared setting.
 
Recognition of Cardiac Arrest
Cardiac arrest is recognized from general assessment and primary sur
-
vey findings consistent with a pale or cyanotic child who is unrespon
-
sive, apneic, and pulseless. Even experienced providers have a relatively 
high error rate when asked to determine presence or absence of pulse 
in a child. Therefore lay rescuers should begin CPR immediately for 
any patient without signs of life. Healthcare providers can palpate for 
a pulse for up to 10 seconds but should provide CPR unless a pulse is 
definitively felt.
Although initial responders should focus on signs of lifeless
-
ness when determining if a patient requires CPR, recognition and 
understanding of cardiac arrest rhythms is also important for pro
-
viders. Most pediatric cardiac arrest rhythms are “nonshockable” 
(i.e., asystole, pulseless electrical activity [PEA], or bradycardia with 
cardiopulmonary compromise). It is important pediatric providers 
recognize that bradycardia with cardiopulmonary compromise that 
does not swiftly resolve with ventilation and oxygenation should 
be treated with CPR. “Shockable” rhythms (ventricular fibrillation 
[VF]	and	pulseless	VT)	account	for	a	relatively	small	proportion	of	
pediatric OHCAs or IHCAs. However, these rhythms can occur as 
a secondary rhythm later in arrest. Because these rhythms require 
prompt defibrillation in addition to high- quality CPR, it is impor
-
tant	to	recognize	and	be	prepared	to	treat	VF	or	pulseless	VT	when	
present.
 
Basic Life Support
The AHA Pediatric BLS algorithms for both single-  and two- rescuer 
scenarios are depicted in 
Figures 79.1 and 79.2
. Upon recognition of 
cardiac arrest, rescuers should begin CPR with both chest compres
-
sions and rescue breaths. Single rescuers who witness a sudden col
-
lapse should activate the emergency response system and retrieve an 
automated electronic defibrillator (AED) or defibrillator, if immedi
-
ately available, before starting compressions, as many of these chil
-
dren have shockable rhythms. For single rescuers treating children 
in cardiac arrest without a witnessed sudden collapse, CPR should 
begin immediately with cycles of 30 compressions followed by two 
rescuer breaths for at least 2 minutes. An AED should be applied, and 
automated directions followed as soon as it is available. When two or 
more rescuers are present, one rescuer should be responsible for acti
-
vating the emergency response system and retrieving an AED while 
the other rescuer(s) begins CPR. When both rescuers are providing 
CPR for an infant or prepubescent child, cycles of 15 compressions 
followed by two ventilations should be provided. Adolescents should 
receive cycles of 30 compressions and two ventilations regardless of 
the number of rescuers.
 
Components of High- Quality Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation
The goal of CPR is to provide temporary blood flow and oxygen deliv
-
ery to the body during cardiac arrest. High- quality CPR that meets estab
-
lished goals and metrics optimizes this blood flow and is associated with 
improved outcomes from cardiac arrest. 
Components of high- quality 
CPR include optimal hand positioning, appropriate chest compression 
rate, adequate chest compression depth, allowing for full chest recoil, 
minimization of interruptions, and appropriate ventilation rate.
Fig. 79.13
 Hand position for infant CPR for the single provider. The 
two- finger technique.
Fig. 79.14
 Hand position for infant CPR for two providers. The 
2- thumb- encircling hands technique.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79
 u 
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory  Emergencies and Resuscitation 
565
Hand positioning and CPR technique:
 Chest compressions in 
infants <1 year old performed by a single provider may be performed 
by placing two fingers or two thumbs just below the intramammary 
line (
Fig. 79.13
). When two providers are present, the two- thumb- 
encircling hands technique (
Fig. 79.14
) is recommended unless the 
rescuer cannot physically encircle the victim’s chest, in which case 
two fingers can be used. If goal depths cannot be reached with these 
techniques, it is reasonable to use the heel of one hand for chest com
-
pressions. For children >1 year old, the care provider should per
-
form chest compressions over the lower half of the sternum with the 
heel of one hand, or with two hands as used for adult resuscitation 
(
Fig. 79.15
). In all cases, care should be taken to avoid compression 
of the xiphoid and the ribs. When feasible, a backboard should be 
placed under the child’s back and the hospital bed should be placed 
into “CPR mode” when applicable to maximize the effectiveness of 
compressions.
Chest compression mechanics:
 Chest compressions should be pro
-
vided at a rate of 
100- 120 compressions per minute
. The goal chest 
compression depth for infants and children is at least 
one- third the 
anterior- posterior diameter of the chest
, which is approximately 4 
cm (1.5 inches) in infants and 5 cm (2 inches) in children. For chil
-
dren who have reached puberty, the adult depth of 5- 6 cm can be used. 
Rescuers should avoid leaning and 
allow the chest to fully recoil
 after 
each compression in order to facilitate venous return to the heart. 
Resuscitation teams should seek to 
minimize the duration and fre
-
quency of chest compression interruptions
 during CPR. These chest 
compression mechanics can be measured during CPR through CPR 
quality- monitoring defibrillators, which are now widely used.
 
Advanced Life Support
The AHA PALS algorithm for cardiac arrest is depicted in 
Figure 79.16
. 
Chest compressions should be delivered as detailed earlier. Ventilation 
is a key component of pediatric CPR because most patients have con
-
comitant respiratory failure. For children without an advanced airway 
in place, chest compressions are paused to allow for the delivery of ven
-
tilations via mask with the compression- to- ventilation ratios discussed 
previously. For children with an advanced airway at the time of arrest, 
ventilations should be provided asynchronously (i.e., without inter
-
rupting chest compressions) at a rate of 20- 30 breaths/minute. Pro
-
viders should avoid overventilation during CPR, as this may increase 
intrathoracic pressure and decrease venous return to the heart.
Epinephrine is administered during CPR to increase systemic vas
-
cular resistance and coronary perfusion pressure in order to restore 
spontaneous circulation. Epinephrine should be administered intrave
-
nously	or	intraosseously	(IO),	though	it	can	be	administered	via	ETT	
if IV or IO access is not available (see 
Table	79.5
). 
The first dose of 
epinephrine should be given within 5 minutes of the onset of cardiac 
arrest and repeated every 3- 5 minutes
 until return of spontaneous 
circulation (ROSC) is achieved. Pulse and rhythm checks should be 
performed approximately every 2 minutes but should not last more 
than 10 seconds.
CPR quality can also be gauged by monitoring the patient’s physi
-
ologic response to resuscitation. End- tidal carbon dioxide, which 
reflects pulmonary blood flow, can be an indicator of the adequacy of 
chest compressions. Diastolic blood pressure, measured via an arterial 
line, is used as a surrogate of coronary perfusion pressure, and values 
are therefore correlated with the likelihood of ROSC. Either of these 
tools can be used during CPR by practitioners appropriately trained in 
the nuances of their interpretation.
 
Defibrillation and Antiarrhythmic Medications
For	those	children	with	VF	or	pulseless	VT,	emergency	defibrillation	
is indicated (see 
Fig. 79.16
). Defibrillator pads should be applied to the 
bare chest during CPR regardless of initial rhythm, as these rhythms 
can develop later during cardiac arrest. Lay providers should follow 
the verbal instructions given by the AED. Ideally, the AED used for 
children <8 years of age should deliver an attenuated adult dose or 
should be designed for children; if neither of these options is available, 
a standard adult AED should be used. Healthcare providers should 
use either an AED or a manual defibrillator. An 
initial defibrillation 
should be provided at a dose of 2 J/kg
 
with subsequent dosing per the 
PALS algorithm. CPR should be promptly resumed after each defibril
-
lation attempt, with additional rhythm assessments and defibrillation 
attempts every 2 minutes while a shockable rhythm persists. Either 
amiodarone or lidocaine can be given as an antiarrhythmic for shock- 
refractory	VF	or	VT	(see	
Table	79.5
).
 
Identification and Treatment of Underlying Causes of 
Cardiac Arrest
Pediatric cardiac arrest can occur because of a discrete and clear event 
(e.g., drowning), due to the progression of underlying disease pro
-
cesses (e.g., refractory hypoxemic respiratory failure), or for reasons 
that are unclear to the resuscitation team at the time of the arrest. In 
addition to providing high- quality CPR, reversing the underlying cause 
of cardiac arrest is critical in order to restore and maintain spontane
-
ous circulation. Focused evaluation of likely etiologies based on the 
patient’s history, risk factors, physical exam, and other findings often 
reveals addressable cause. Additionally, providers should systemati
-
cally address common and correctable causes of cardiac arrest (e.g., the 
“Hs	and	Ts”;	
Table	79.6
).
 
Duration of CPR
Unsurprisingly, children who receive prolonged CPR have worse out
-
comes than those who require brief CPR. However, previous assertions 
Fig. 79.15
 Hand position for child CPR. 
A,
 One- handed chest compressions in a child. 
B,
 Two- handed chest compressions in a child or adult.
AB
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

566 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
that CPR >20 minutes in duration was futile have been disproven. More 
than 15% of children who received >35 minutes of CPR for IHCA sur
-
vived to hospital discharge in one large registry study. Therefore deci
-
sions regarding futility and when to cease resuscitation efforts should 
take into account patient factors, goals of care, arrest etiology and char
-
acteristics, and a host of other factors, rather than CPR duration alone.
 
Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation and 
Extracorporeal Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)
 is a modified 
form of cardiopulmonary bypass that can be employed in children 
with severe cardiac or respiratory failure. Blood is removed from a 
large central vein, carried through tubing to an oxygenator for gas 
• Begin bag-mask ventilation and give oxygen• Attach monitor/defibrillator1
2
3
5
4
6
7
8
12
11
10
9
Pediatric cardiac arrest algorithm
Start CPRNoNoNoNoNoYesYesYesYesYesShockShockShockEpinephrineASAPRhythmshockable?Rhythmshockable?Rhythmshockable?Rhythmshockable?Rhythmshockable?Asystole/PEAVF/pVTCPR 2 minIV/IO access• IV/IO access• Epinephrine every 3–5 min• Consider advanced
  airway and capnography• Epinephrine every 3–5 min• Consider advanced airway• Amiodarone or lidocaine• Treat reversible causesCPR 2 minCPR 2 minTreat reversible causesCPR 2 minCPR 2 min• If no signs of return of spontaneous  circulation (ROSC), go to 10• If ROSC, go to Post-Cardiac Arrest
  Care checklistGo to 7.• Hypovolemia• Hypoxia• Hydrogen ion (acidosis)• Hypoglycemia• Hypo-/hyperkalemia• Hypothermia• Tension pneumothorax• Tamponade, cardiac• Toxins• Thrombosis, pulmonary• Thrombosis, coronaryReversible causesAdvanced airway• Endotracheal intubation or  supraglottic advanced airway
• Waveform capnography or
  capnometry to confirm and  monitor ET tube placementDrug therapy• Push hard (greaterequal    of anteroposterior  diameter of chest) and fast  (100–120/min) and allow complete
  chest recoil
• Minimize interruptions in
  compressions
• Change compressor every
  2 minutes, or sooner if fatigued• If no advanced airway, 15:2
  compression-ventilation ratio• If advanced airway, provide  continuous compressions and  give a breath every 2–3 seconds
³Shock energy for defibrillationCPR quality• First shock 2 J/kg• Second shock 4 J/kg
• Subsequent shocks greaterequal4 J/kg,  maximum 10 J/kg or adult dose• Epinephrine IV/IO dose:  0.01 mg/kg (0.1 mL/kg of the  0.1 mg/mL concentration).
  Max dose 1 mg.
  Repeat every 3–5 minutes.  If no IV/IO access, may give
  endotracheal dose: 0.1 mg/kg
  (0.1 mL/kg of the 1 mg/mL
  concentration).
• Amiodarone IV/IO dose:  5 mg/kg bolus during cardiac  arrest. May repeat up to
  3 total doses for refractory
  VF/pulseless VT
  or  Lidocaine IV/IO dose:  Initial: 1 mg/kg loading dose
Fig. 79.16
 Pediatric advanced life support cardiac arrest algorithm. CPR, Cardiopulmonary resuscitation; IO/IV, intraosseous/intravenous; PEA, 
pulseless electrical activity; VF/VT, ventricular fibrillation/tachycardia. (
From Topjian AA, Raymond TT, Atkins D, et al. Part 4: Pediatric Basic and 
Advanced Life Support: 2020 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Cir
-
culation. 2020;142[16 Suppl 2]:S469- S523.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79
 u 
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory  Emergencies and Resuscitation 
567
exchange, and then returned to the body via either a vein (venove
-
nous or VV- ECMO) or an artery (venoarterial or VA- ECMO). VV- 
ECMO is typically used in patients with refractory respiratory failure 
who require ECMO for gas exchange but continue to rely on their 
native cardiac function for cardiac output. VA- ECMO is used for 
patients with shock or cardiac failure, with or without concomitant 
respiratory failure, with the ECMO pump and circuit augmenting or 
replacing native cardiac output. The processes of determining ECMO 
candidacy, performing ECMO cannulation, maintaining ECMO 
circuit integrity, and caring for critically ill children on ECMO are 
able 79.6 
 
 Potentially Reversible Causes of Cardiac Arrest
CONDITION
COMMON CLINICAL SETTINGS
TREATMENT
THE H’S
Hypovolemia
Dehydration, hemorrhage, major burns, diabetes, 
gastrointestinal losses, shock, and trauma
Administer fluids
For hemorrhage, administer packed red blood cells and other blood products
Hypoxemia
Upper airway obstruction (croup, anaphylaxis, 
foreign body)
Lower airway obstruction (asthma, bronchiolitis)
Parenchymal lung disease (pneumonia)
Restrictive lung disease (pleural effusion)
Provide supplemental oxygen
Confirm endotracheal tube placement and chest rise
Hydrogen ion 
(acidosis)
Preexisting acidosis, diabetes, diarrhea, drugs 
and toxins, prolonged resuscitation, renal 
disease, and shock
Reassess the adequacy of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, oxygenation, 
and ventilation; reconfirm endotracheal tube placement
Ensure adequate ventilation and avoid concomitant respiratory acidosis
Administer IV fluids
May consider bicarbonate administration with documented severe acidosis
Hypoglycemia
Starvation, toxin, diabetes medications, 
metabolic disease
Administer dextrose (glucagon if dextrose not available)
Discontinue causative medications
Hyperkalemia
Metabolic acidosis, excessive administration 
of potassium, renal failure, drugs and toxins, 
vigorous exercise, hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, 
tumor lysis syndrome, and clinically significant 
tissue injury
Stop potassium- containing fluids
Stabilize cardiac membrane: calcium
Treat acidosis: sodium bicarbonate
Shift potassium intracellularly: sodium bicarbonate, insulin (with glucose 
to prevent hypoglycemia), and albuterol
Promote potassium excretion: loop diuretics, Kayexalate
Removal of potassium: dialysis
Hypokalemia
Diabetes, diuretic use, drugs and toxins, 
profound gastrointestinal losses
If profound hypokalemia is accompanied by cardiac arrest, initiate urgent 
IV potassium replacement
Hypothermia
Alcohol abuse, burns, central nervous system 
disease, debilitated patient, drowning, drugs 
and toxins, endocrine disease, history of 
exposure, homelessness, extensive skin 
disease, spinal cord disease, and trauma
If	hypothermia	is	severe	(temperature	<30°C	[86°F]),	defibrillation	may	be	
ineffective; initiate active internal rewarming with cardiopulmonary 
support; can consider extracorporeal rewarming
If hypothermia is moderate (temperature 30- 34°C [86- 93.2°F]), actively 
rewarm during CPR
THE T’S
Tension 
 
pneumothorax
Procedural complication, mechanical ventilation 
complication, pulmonary disease with 
 
“air leak” (including asthma, chronic 
 
obstructive pulmonary disease, and necrotizing 
pneumonia), thoracentesis, and trauma
Needle decompression followed by chest tube insertion or primary chest 
tube insertion
Cardiac 
 
tamponade
Hemorrhage, malignancy, pericarditis, trauma, 
cardiac surgery, post–myocardial infarction
Administer fluids to increase cardiac preload (temporizing only); 
obtain bedside echocardiogram, if available
Perform pericardiocentesis; immediate surgical intervention is 
 
appropriate if pericardiocentesis is unhelpful but cardiac tamponade 
is known or highly suspected
Toxins
Alcohol abuse, behavioral or metabolic 
presentation, classic toxicologic syndrome, 
psychiatric disease, depressed mental status 
of unclear etiology, medications in the home, 
history of depression/suicidality
Supportive care and toxin- directed therapies in consultation with a 
toxicologist
Thrombosis, 
 
pulmonary
Hospitalized patient, recent surgical procedure, 
peripartum, known risk factors for venous 
thromboembolism, history of venous 
thromboembolism, or prearrest presentation 
consistent with a diagnosis of acute pulmonary 
embolism, recent immobility or fractures
Administer fluids; augment with vasoactive medications as necessary
Consider pulmonary vasodilators (e.g., inhaled nitric oxide)
Consider systemic or site- directed thrombolytic therapy
Consider mechanical thrombectomy
Consider ECMO
Thrombosis, 
coronary
Known risk factors for myocardial infarction 
(congenital heart disease, family history of 
sudden cardiac death)
Consider fibrinolytic therapy
Consider percutaneous coronary intervention
Adapted from Kleinman ME, Chameides L, Schexnayder SM, et al. Part 14: Pediatric advanced life support: 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary 
Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. 
Circulation
. 2010;122(18 Suppl 3):S876- S908.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

568 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 79.7 
 
 Medications to Maintain Cardiac Output and for Postarrest Stabilization
*
MEDICATION
DOSE
 RANGE
COMMENT
Dobutamine
2- 20 μg/kg/min IV/IO
Inotrope, chronotrope, vasodilator
Dopamine
2- 20 μg/kg/min IV/IO
Inotrope, chronotrope, vasodilator at low doses, 
vasoconstrictor at high doses
Epinephrine
0.01- 1 μg/kg/min IV/IO
Inotrope, chronotrope, vasodilator at low doses, 
 
vasoconstrictor at medium and high doses
Milrinone
50 μg/kg IV/IO over 10- 60 min then 0.25- 0.75 μg/kg/min
Inodilator, lusitrope, vasodilator
Norepinephrine
0.01- 1 μg/kg/min
Vasopressor; weak inotrope
*Alternative formula for calculating an infusion: Infusion rate (mL/hr) = [weight (kg) × dose (μg/kg/min) × 60 (min/hr)]/concentration μg/mL).
Data from Kleinman ME, Brennan EE, Goldberger ZD, et al. Part 5: Adult Basic Life Support and Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation Quality: 2015 American Heart Association Guidelines 
Update for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. 
Circulation
. 2015;132(18 Suppl 2):S414- S435.
complex; ECMO is thus performed only at centers with appropriate 
expertise and equipment.
Extracorporeal support can be employed as a rescue therapy for 
refractory cardiac arrest. Extracorporeal CPR (ECPR), which involves 
cannulating and placing a patient on VA- ECMO while CPR is in prog
-
ress, has been successfully used in children. Its efficacy has been best 
demonstrated in hospitalized children with underlying cardiac disease; 
AHA guidelines therefore state that it can be considered for children 
“with cardiac diagnoses who have IHCA in settings with existing 
ECMO protocols, expertise, and equipment.” In addition, ECPR has 
been employed in patients with noncardiac etiologies of cardiopulmo
-
nary arrest who are not responding to standard resuscitation protocols.
 
Post–Cardiac Arrest Care
After resuscitation from cardiac arrest, patients are at risk for devel
-
oping 
post- cardiac arrest syndrome (PCAS)
. PCAS is composed of 
post–cardiac arrest brain injury, myocardial dysfunction, systemic 
ischemia- reperfusion response, and persistence of preexisting patho
-
physiology and can last for days to weeks after the cardiac arrest. Pri
-
mary brain injury occurs due to hypoxia and ischemia during the 
no- flow (pre- CPR) and low- flow (during CPR) periods. Secondary 
brain injury occurs during the postarrest period. Signs and symp
-
toms of brain injury are encephalopathy, seizures, cerebral edema, 
and autonomic dysfunction. Myocardial dysfunction can present 
as hypotension, depressed left or right ventricular systolic or dia
-
stolic function, arrhythmias, or pulmonary edema. The systemic 
ischemia- reperfusion response is a “sepsis- like” syndrome and has 
clinical findings of hyperglycemia, coagulopathy, hypovolemia, fever, 
and multisystem organ dysfunction. These three components com
-
bined with the precipitant that caused the arrest (e.g., septic shock 
or PARDS) result in varied severity of PCAS ranging from minimal 
symptoms, with patients returning quickly to their neurologic base
-
line, to severe multisystem organ failure with high risk of repeat car
-
diac arrest.
To	address	this	clinical	spectrum,	it	is	important	to	be	deliberate	
and vigilant in caring for the postarrest patient. Thus close postarrest 
observation in an intensive care unit, where the child can receive ongo
-
ing	multiorgan	system	assessments	and	support,	is	critical.	To	prevent	
secondary brain injury, which occurs during the postarrest period, cli
-
nicians should monitor for, prevent, and treat PCAS. Hypotension is 
common and can lead to organ hypoperfusion. Clinicians should fre
-
quently monitor blood pressure and should do so continuously with 
an arterial catheter if appropriate resources are available. IV fluids 
and vasoactive agents such as epinephrine or norepinephrine should 
be used to maintain a blood pressure greater than the fifth percentile 
for age. Clinicians should be proactive and not wait for hypotension 
to occur. Rather, they should be prepared with fluids, vasoactive infu
-
sions, and clearly defined postarrest blood pressure targets. Continu
-
ous arterial blood pressure monitoring can help the provider determine 
the need for, and response to, inotropic and chronotropic medications 
(
Table	79.7
).
Hyperoxia (Pa
o
2
 >300) and hypoxemia after cardiac arrest should 
be prevented because both can worsen secondary brain injury. Cli
-
nicians should wean supplemental oxygen after ROSC, targeting a 
saturation of 94–99%. In most cases, weaning supplemental oxygen 
when patients are saturating 100% is not harmful. For patients with 
hypoxemia, clinicians may need to try alternative ventilator strategies 
if supplemental oxygen is insufficient to achieve a saturation above 
94% or higher.
Fever is common after cardiac arrest and may worsen second
-
ary brain injury. 
Targeted temperature management (TTM)
 is 
performed with an active temperature control device and should 
be used for children postarrest who do not return to their neuro
-
logic baseline. Because there is no difference in survival or neuro
-
logic	outcomes	between	patients	who	receive	TTM	33°C	(32-	34°C	
[89.6-	91.4°F])	and	patients	who	receive	TTM	36.8°C	(98.2°F)	
(36- 37.5°C [96.8- 99.5°F]), either can be selected. Patients should 
have continuous core temperature monitoring and receive sedation 
and analgesics to prevent discomfort. If shivering occurs, patients 
should be treated with a sedative or neuromuscular blockade. 
Hyperthermia must be avoided.
Seizures are common after cardiac arrest and often are noncon
-
vulsive and therefore can only be detected on an EEG. It is unclear 
if treatment improves outcomes; however, antiseizure medications 
can be administered for convulsive and nonconvulsive seizures.
Most care is supportive, but close monitoring for organ injury that 
can be treated (e.g., coagulopathy or adrenal insufficiency) or that may 
require modification of therapies (e.g., medication dose adjusting in 
patients with acute kidney injury) should be considered. Survivors of 
cardiac arrest can have long- standing neurologic, cognitive, physical, 
and quality- of- life deficits. Clinicians should refer children for ongoing 
evaluation and assessments.
Communication with the patient’s family is an essential element 
of postarrest care, as it is for the care of any acutely ill or injured 
child.	The	family	should	be	thoroughly	briefed	on	the	elements	
of the resuscitation performed, the child’s condition, and ongoing 
medical	concerns,	uncertainties,	or	issues.	The	provider	should	be	
available to answer the family’s questions, clarify information, and 
provide comfort. Other support staff, including social workers and 
chaplains, should be contacted, as the family wishes, to provide 
additional support and comfort. For situations in which the resus
-
citation is ongoing, it is recommended that the provider make every 
effort possible to have the family present at the bedside, if they 
wish. Family presence during CPR or other emergency resuscita
-
tive efforts, even if the child dies, is associated with a more positive 
medical experience than if they are excluded. In situations where 
the child is critically ill but stable, the family should be brought to 
the bedside as soon as the healthcare team deems it safe and appro
-
priate (see 
Chapter 8
).
 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 79
 u 
Pediatric Cardiorespiratory  Emergencies and Resuscitation 
569
PROCEDURES
Vascular Access
Venous Access
Veins suitable for cannulation are numerous, but there is considerable 
anatomic variation from patient to patient. In the upper extremities, 
the 
median antecubital vein,
 located in the antecubital fossa, is often 
the largest and easiest to access. Many veins on the dorsum of the hand 
are also suitable for cannulation because they are often large and easily 
located, and their cannulation is generally well tolerated. The 
cephalic 
vein
 is usually cannulated at the wrist, along the forearm, or at the 
elbow. The 
median vein
 of the forearm is also suitable as it lies along a 
flat surface of the forearm. In the lower extremity, the 
great saphenous 
vein,
 located just anterior to the medial malleolus, is accessible in most 
patients. The dorsum of the foot usually has a large vein in the midline, 
passing across the ankle joint, but catheters are difficult to maintain in 
Subclavian veinSternal notchClavicle
Fig. 79.19
 Approach to the subclavian vein. The patient is supine, in 
slight Trendelenburg position, with a small roll along the spine between 
the shoulders. The needle enters the skin at the junction of the lateral 
and middle thirds of the inferior clavicle and is directed toward the su
-
prasternal notch, passing along the inferior edge of the clavicle. (
From 
Edwards LR, Malone MP, Prodham P, Schexnayder SM. Pediatric vas
-
cular access and centeses. In: Zimmerman JJ, Rotta AT, eds. Fuhrman 
& Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier: 
2022: Fig. 14.5, p. 102.
)
Ipsilateral nippleInternal jugular vein
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
A
Ipsilateral nippleInternal jugular veinSternocleidomastoidmuscleCarotid artery
B
Fig. 79.18
 Approaches to the internal jugular vein. The patient is supine, in slight Trendelenburg position, with the neck extended over a shoulder 
roll and the head rotated to the contralateral side. 
A,
 Middle approach: The introducer needle enters the skin at a 30- degree angle at the apex of 
the triangle formed by the heads of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and clavicle, directing it toward the ipsilateral nipple. 
B,
 Anterior approach: The 
carotid pulse is palpated and may be slightly retracted medially. The introducer needle enters along the anterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid, 
about halfway between the suprasternal notch and mastoid process, while being directed toward the ipsilateral nipple. (
Modified from Edwards LR, 
Malone MP, Prodham P, Schexnayder SM. Pediatric vascular access and centeses. In: Zimmerman JJ, Rotta AT, eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pedi
-
atric Critical Care, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 14.4, p. 101.
)
Inguinal ligamentFemoral veinFemoral arteryFemoralnerveRight leg
Fig. 79.17
 Approach to the femoral vein. The patient is flat and su
-
pine, with the thigh slightly abducted and externally rotated. The in
-
troducer needle enters the skin 1- 2 cm distal to the inguinal ligament 
and 0.5- 1 cm medial to the pulse of the femoral artery. Remember the 
lateral to medial mnemonic NAVEL for nerve, artery, vein, empty space, 
and lymphatics. (
From Edwards LR, Malone MP, Prodham P, Schexnay
-
der SM. Pediatric vascular access and centeses. In: Zimmerman JJ, 
Rotta AT, eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 14.6, p. 102.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

570 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
this vein because dorsiflexion tends to dislodge them. A second large 
vein on the lateral side of the foot, running in the horizontal plane, 
usually 1- 2 cm dorsal to the lower margin of the foot, is preferable. The 
most notable scalp veins are the 
superficial temporal
 (just anterior to 
the ear) and 
posterior auricular
 (just behind the ear).
Deeper and larger central veins can provide more reliable access 
for medications, nutritive solutions, and blood sampling than 
peripheral venous lines. Placement of central access should be con
-
sidered in the patient with difficult peripheral access where IVs may 
be challenging to obtain or may last for brief periods with increased 
risk of infiltration; when a patient is critically ill requiring numer
-
ous medications and needs stable access; when a patient requires IV 
vasoactive medications for more than a brief period; if long- term 
medications need to be administered in the hospital or at home; or 
if administered agents are vascular irritants (IV nutrition, electro
-
lyte infusions, certain antibiotics). Central veins 
may be reached 
by percutaneous cannulation or surgical exposure. In infants and 
young children, the 
femoral vein
 or 
internal jugular vein
 are often 
the easiest to access and cannulate, but the subclavian veins may 
also be used (
Figs. 79.17, 79.18, and 79.19
). Peripherally inserted 
central catheters (PICCs) can be placed for longer- term access 
through the upper or lower extremity to administer medications or 
IV nutrition and can be used at home. With the expansion of bed
-
side ultrasound availability and expertise, central venous catheters 
should be placed under ultrasound guidance to improve first- pass 
success and minimize the risk of complications.
 
Intraosseous Access
IO needles (for intramedullary venous plexus access) are special
-
ized, rigid, large- bore needles. IO cannulation is recommended 
for patients in whom IV access proves difficult or unattainable in 
an emergent setting, even in older children. If venous access is not 
available within approximately 1 minute in a child with cardiopul
-
monary arrest, an IO needle should be placed in the anterior proxi
-
mal tibia (with care taken to avoid traversing the epiphyseal plate) or 
other approved site. The needle should penetrate the anterior layer of 
compact bone, and its tip is advanced into the spongy interior of the 
bone (
Fig. 79.20
). Commercially available IO kits frequently include 
drills that mitigate the complications of needle placement associated 
with manual placement. All medications, blood products, and flu
-
ids may be administered through the IO route, including medica
-
tions required for emergency resuscitation. Laboratory values can 
be sampled, although a complete blood count will be unreliable. 
Complications are uncommon but may include osteomyelitis with 
prolonged infusions, tibial fracture, and infiltration of fluids with 
dislodgement.
 
Arterial Access
Arterial access is indicated when care providers need frequent blood 
sampling, particularly to assess adequacy of oxygenation, ventilation, 
or acid- base balance, or continuous blood pressure monitoring. The 
radial artery,
 the most commonly cannulated artery, lies on the lateral 
side of the anterior wrist, just medial to the styloid process of the radius 
(
Fig. 79.21
). The 
ulnar artery,
 just lateral to the tendon of the flexor 
carpi ulnaris, is used less often because of its proximity to the ulnar 
nerve. Useful sites in the lower extremity, particularly in neonates and 
infants, are the 
dorsalis pedis artery,
 on the dorsum of the foot between 
the tendons of the tibialis anterior and the extensor hallucis longus, 
and the 
posterior tibial artery,
 posterior to the medial malleolus. Arte
-
rial catheters require special care for insertion and subsequent manage
-
ment. Clinicians should monitor for signs of decreased perfusion distal 
to catheter placement.
 
NONVASCULAR EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Thoracentesis and Chest Tube Placement
Thoracentesis is the placement of a needle or catheter into the pleural 
space to evacuate fluid, blood, or air. Most insertions are performed 
in one of the intercostal spaces between the fourth and sixth ribs in 
the plane of the midaxillary line. After appropriate systemic and local 
anesthesia/sedation, a needle (and later the chest tube) that enters the 
pleural space should penetrate the intercostal space by passing over the 
superior edge of the lower rib, because there are larger vessels along the 
inferior edge of the rib. Ideally, the chest tube should lie 
anterior
 in the 
pleural space for air accumulation and 
posterior
 for fluid accumula
-
tion. A radiograph must be obtained to verify chest tube placement and 
evacuation of the pleural space.
 
Pericardiocentesis
When fluid, blood, or gas accumulates in the pericardial sac, the heart 
may become compressed and may be unable to fill/empty with normal 
volumes of blood, leading to diminished cardiac output (i.e., pericar
-
dial tamponade with obstructive shock). The cardinal signs of such a 
restrictive pericardial effusion are tachycardia and hypotension, gener
-
ally with a narrowed pulse pressure. Pericardiocentesis includes needle 
aspiration of the pericardial sac, often followed by the placement of a 
catheter for continuous drainage. As with thoracentesis, chest radiog
-
raphy should be done to confirm catheter location and to evaluate for 
any complications, such as pneumothorax or hemothorax. Pericardio
-
centesis may be performed with echocardiography.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Tibial tuberosity
Growth plateInsert needle intomedial flat surfaceof the anterior tibia
Fig 79.20
 Insertion of the intraosseous needle into the anterior tibia. 
(From Edwards LR, Malone MP, Prodham P, Schexnayder SM. Pediatric 
vascular access and centeses. In: Zimmerman JJ, Rotta AT, eds. Fuhr
-
man & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Else
-
vier; 2022: Fig. 14.2, p. 95.)
RadiusRadial
artery
Abductor
pollicis longus
Flexorretinaculum
Flexor carpi
radialis
Fig. 79.21
 Radial artery anatomy and cannulation.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 80
 u 
Acute Care of Multiple Trauma 
571
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Injury is a leading cause of death and disability in children through
-
out the world (see 
Chapter 14
). Deaths represent only a small frac
-
tion of the total trauma burden. Approximately 140,000 children were 
treated in U.S. trauma centers in 2016 for serious injury. Many survi
-
vors of trauma have permanent or temporary functional limitations. 
Motor vehicle–related injuries and falls rank among the top 15 causes 
of disability- adjusted life years in children worldwide. In childhood, 
blunt trauma predominates, accounting for the majority of injuries. In 
adolescence, penetrating trauma increases in frequency, accounting for 
approximately 13% of injuries, and penetrating trauma secondary to a 
firearm is associated with a high case fatality rate of 11%.
 
REGIONALIZATION AND TRAUMA TEAMS
Morbidity and mortality rates have decreased in geographic regions 
with	comprehensive,	coordinated	trauma	systems.	Treatment	at	des
-
ignated trauma centers is associated with decreased mortality. At the 
scene of injury, paramedics should administer necessary advanced life 
support and perform 
triage
 (
Fig. 80.1
). It is usually preferable to bypass 
local hospitals and rapidly transport a seriously injured child directly 
to a pediatric trauma center (or a trauma center with pediatric com
-
mitment). 
Children have lower mortality rates, lower complication rates, 
and fewer operative interventions after severe blunt trauma when they 
are treated in designated pediatric trauma centers or in hospitals with 
pediatric intensive care units.
When the receiving emergency department (ED) is notified before 
the child’s arrival, the trauma team should be mobilized in advance. 
Each member has defined tasks. A senior surgeon (surgical coordina
-
tor)	or	an	emergency	physician	leads	the	team.	Team	compositions	
vary somewhat from hospital to hospital; 
Figure 80.2
 shows the model 
used at the Johns Hopkins Hospital Bloomberg Children’s Center (Bal
-
timore, MD). Consultants, especially neurosurgeons and orthopedic 
surgeons, must be promptly available, and the operating room staff 
should be alerted.
Physiologic status and mechanism of injury are used for field triage 
and to determine whether to activate the trauma team. More impor
-
tance should be placed on physiologic compromise and less on mech
-
anism of injury. Scoring scales such as the Abbreviated Injury Scale 
(AIS),	Injury	Severity	Score	(ISS),	Pediatric	Trauma	Score	(
Table	80.1
), 
and	Revised	Trauma	Score	use	these	parameters	to	predict	patient	
outcome. The AIS and ISS are used together. First, the AIS is used to 
numerically	score	injuries—as	1	minor,	2	moderate,	3	serious,	4	severe,	
5	critical,	or	6	probably	lethal—in	each	of	six	ISS	body	regions:	head/
neck, face, thorax, abdomen and pelvic contents, extremities/bony pel
-
vis, and external. The ISS is the sum of the squares of the highest three 
AIS region scores.
 
ATLS: SYSTEMATIC EVALUATION OF THE 
 
INJURED PATIENT
The American College of Surgeons (ACS) endorses a systematic 
approach to trauma patients known as 
Advanced Trauma Life Sup
-
port
	(ATLS).	ATLS	is	accepted	as	the	standard	of	care	for	the	ini
-
tial assessment of injured patients and is used internationally. The 
approach is centered on a standardized patient evaluation that priori
-
tizes identification and management of injuries in a specific order that 
addresses	their	immediate	risk	to	life.	ATLS	principles	are	detailed	here	
and include performance of the primary survey with initial adjuncts 
followed by the secondary survey.
 
PRIMARY SURVEY
During the primary survey, the trauma team quickly assesses and treats 
life- threatening injuries (see also 
Chapter 79
). The principal causes of 
death shortly after trauma are airway obstruction, respiratory insuf
-
ficiency, shock from hemorrhage, and central nervous system (CNS) 
injury. The primary survey addresses the 
ABCDEs
: Airway, Breathing, 
Circulation, Disability/Neurologic Deficit, and Exposure of the patient 
and control of the Environment.
Airway
Optimizing oxygenation and ventilation, while protecting the cervical 
spine (C- spine) from potential further injury, is of paramount impor
-
tance. Airway obstruction manifests as snoring, gurgling, hoarseness, 
stridor, and/or diminished breath sounds even with apparently good 
respiratory effort. Children are more likely than adults to have airway 
obstruction because of their smaller oral and nasal cavities, propor
-
tionately larger tongues, more tonsillar and adenoidal tissue, higher 
and more anterior glottic opening, and narrower larynx and trachea. 
Obstruction is common in patients with severe head injuries, partly 
because of decreased muscle tone, which allows the tongue to fall pos
-
teriorly and occlude the airway. With trauma, obstruction can also 
result from fractures of the mandible or facial bones, secretions such 
as blood or vomit, crush injuries of the larynx or trachea, and foreign 
body aspiration.
If it is necessary to open the airway, a jaw thrust without head tilt 
is recommended. This procedure minimizes cervical spine motion. 
In an unconscious child, an oropharyngeal airway may be inserted to 
prevent posterior displacement of the mandibular tissues. A semicon
-
scious child will gag with an oropharyngeal airway but may tolerate 
a nasopharyngeal airway. A nasopharyngeal airway is contraindicated 
when there is significant nasal trauma or possibility of cribriform plate 
fracture. If these maneuvers plus suctioning do not clear the airway, 
oral endotracheal intubation is indicated. When endotracheal intuba
-
tion proves difficult, a laryngeal mask airway can be used as a tempo
-
rary alternative. A laryngeal mask airway consists of a tube with an 
inflatable cuff that rests above the larynx and thus does not require 
placement of the tube into the trachea. Other extraglottic devices that 
can be blindly inserted in a difficult airway scenario include the Com
-
bitube and King laryngeal airway tube; these devices are considered 
temporary and should be exchanged for a definitive airway as soon as 
possible. Video- assisted laryngoscopy or the use of a bougie can also be 
particularly helpful in the management of a difficult airway. Emergency 
cricothyrotomy is needed in <1% of trauma victims.
 
Breathing
The physician assesses breathing by counting the respiratory rate; 
visualizing chest wall motion for symmetry, expansion, and accessory 
muscle use; and auscultating breath sounds in both axillae. Pulse oxim
-
etry and continuous waveform capnography monitoring should also be 
used; however, they may be less reliable in patients with shock. If ven
-
tilation is inadequate, bag- valve- mask ventilation with 100% oxygen 
must be initiated immediately, followed by endotracheal intubation. 
End- expiratory carbon dioxide (CO
2
) detectors or capnography help 
verify accurate tube placement.
Head trauma is the most common cause of respiratory insufficiency. 
An unconscious child with severe head injury may have a variety of 
breathing abnormalities, including Cheyne- Stokes respiration, slow 
irregular breaths, and apnea. A child with significant neurologic 
impairment will require endotracheal intubation and mechanical 
ventilation.
Although less common than a pulmonary contusion, tension pneu
-
mothorax and massive hemothorax are immediately life threatening 
(
Tables	80.2	and	80.3
). A 
tension pneumothorax
 occurs when air 
accumulates under pressure in the pleural space. The adjacent lung is 
compacted; the mediastinum is pushed toward the opposite hemitho
-
rax; and the heart, great vessels, and contralateral lung are compressed 
Chapter 
80
Acute Care of Multiple 
Trauma
Courtney W. Mangus, Howard I. Pryor II, 
and Bruce L. Klein
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

572 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Transport to a traumacenter. Steps One and Twoattempt to identify themost seriously injured
patients. These patientsshould be transportedpreferentially to thehighest level of care within
the defined trauma system. 
Measure vital signs and level of consciousness
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Assess anatomy of injury
Assess mechanism ofinjury and evidence ofhigh-energy impact  
Assess special patient orsystem considerations
Transport accordingto protocolWhen in doubt, transport to a trauma center
Transport to a traumacenter, which, dependingupon the defined traumasystem, need not be the
highest level traumacenter.§§Step OneStep Two§Step Three§Step Four
Transport to a traumacenter or hospital capableof timely and thorough
evaluation and initial
management of potentially
serious injuries. Consider
consultation with medical
control.     
• All penetrating injuries to head, neck, torso and extremities proximal to elbow or  knee• Two or more proximal long-bone fractures• Crushed, degloved, mangled, or pulseless extremity• Amputation proximal to wrist or ankle• Pelvic fractures• Open or depressed skull fracture• Paralysis• Falls  — Adults: >20 feet (one story is equal to 10 feet)  — Children¶: >10 feet or two or three times the height of the child• High-risk auto crash  — Intrusion,** including roof: >12 inches occupant site; >18 inches any site  — Ejection (partial or complete) from automobile  — Death in same passenger compartment  — Vehicle telemetry data consistent with a high risk of injury• Motorcycle crash >20 mph
Glasgow Coma Scale   Systolic Blood Pressure (mmHg)Respiratory rate(<20 in infant aged <1 year),or need for ventilatory support 
• Older adults¶¶  — Risk of injury/death increases after age 55 years  — SBP <110 might represent shock after age 65 years  — Low impact mechanisms (e.g. ground level falls) might result in severe injury• Children  — Should be triaged preferentially to pediatric capable trauma centers• Anticoagulants and bleeding disorders  — Patients with head injury are at high risk for rapid deterioration• Burns  — Without other trauma mechanism: triage to burn facility***  — With trauma mechanism: triage to trauma center***• Pregnancy > 20 weeks• EMS provider judgment
*The upper limit of respiratory rate in infants is >29 breaths per minute to maintain a higher level of overtriage for infants. Trauma centers are designated Level I-IV. A Level I center has the greatest amount of resources and personnel for care of the injured patient and provides regional
 
leadership in education, research, and prevention programs. A Level II facility offers similar resources to a Level I facility, possibly differing only in continuous availability of certain subspecialties or sufficient prevention, education, and research activities for Level I designation; Level II facilities are not required to be resident or fellow education centers. A Level III center is capable of assessment, resuscitation, and emergency surgery, with severely injured patients being transferred to a Level I or II facility. A Level IV trauma center is capable of providing 24-hour physician coverage, resuscitation, and stabilization to injured patients before transfer to a facility that provides a higher level of trauma care. §Any injury noted in Step Two or mechanism identified in Step Three triggers a yes response. ¶Age <15 years. **Intrusion refers to interior compartment intrusion, as opposed to deformation which refers to exterior damage. Includes pedestrians or bicyclists thrown or run over by a motor vehicle or those with estimated impact >20 mph with a motor vehicle. §§Local or regional protocols should be used to determine the most appropriate level of trauma center within the defined trauma system; need not be the highest-level trauma center. ¶¶Age >55 years. ***Patients with both burns and concomitant trauma for whom the burn injury poses the greatest risk for morbidity and mortality should be transferred to a burn center. If the nonburn trauma presents a greater immediate risk, the patient may be stabilized in a trauma center and then transferred to a burn center. 

Patients who do not meet any of the triage criteria in Steps One through Four should be transported to the most appropriate medical facility as outlined in local 
EMS protocols.
• Chest wall instability or deformity (e.g., flail chest)• Auto vs. pedestrian/bicyclist thrown, run over, or with significant (>20 mph) impact<10 or >29 breaths per minute* <90 mmHglessequal13
Fig. 80.1
 Algorithm showing guidelines for field triage of injured patients—United States, 2011. (
From Guidelines for Field Triage of Injured 
 
Patients: Recommendations of the National Expert Panel on Field Triage. MMWR. 2012;61:6.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 80
 u 
Acute Care of Multiple Trauma 
573
(see 
Chapter 461
). Both ventilation and cardiac output are impaired. 
Characteristic findings include cyanosis, tachypnea, retractions, asym
-
metric chest rise, contralateral tracheal deviation, diminished breath 
sounds on the ipsilateral (more than contralateral) side, and signs of 
shock. When suspected, a tension pneumothorax should be treated 
before obtaining chest radiographs. Needle thoracentesis, followed by 
thoracostomy tube insertion, is diagnostic and lifesaving. 
Hemothorax
 
results from injury to the intercostal vessels, lungs, heart, or great ves
-
sels. When ventilation is adequate, volume resuscitation should begin 
before evacuation, because a large volume of blood may drain through 
the chest tube, resulting in shock.
 
Circulation
Signs of 
shock
 include tachycardia; weak pulse; delayed capillary refill; 
altered mental status; and cool, mottled, or pale skin (see 
Chapter 85
). 
The most common type of shock in trauma is 
hypovolemic
 
shock
 caused 
by hemorrhage. Cardiac tamponade, which is a form of 
obstructive 
shock,
 occurs when blood or fluid accumulates in the pericardium. It 
may be suspected clinically with the classic findings of jugular venous 
distension,	muffled	heart	sounds,	and	low	blood	pressure—collectively	
known as 
Beck’s triad
. Cardiac tamponade may be definitively diag
-
nosed by ultrasound during a 
focused assessment with sonography in 
Fig. 80.2
 Staff in the ED trauma bay at Johns Hopkins Hospital Bloomberg Children’s Center. ED, Emergency department; NP, nurse practitioner; 
GPS, general pediatric surgery; PICU, pediatric intensive care unit. (
Courtesy The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland.
)
Sample Room Diagram
PICUAttendingPICU Fellow
WithEmergency DepartmentResidentAIRWAYRespiratorytherapyMDs/NPsNursingBedside nurseClinical technicianGeneral PediatricSurgery
ProceduresPICU nursePharmacist (s)Order Entry:ED ResidentDocumenting nurseRLTEAM LEADER
ED Attending/Fellow orGPS Attending/FellowRemains at foot of bed.Does NOT perform procedures.
CHILDLIFEThe Johns Hopkins Hospital ©OUTSIDEROOM•    Social work•    Security
•    Radiology
•    Shift     coordinator
•    Patient 
     services 
     coordinator
•    Pastoral careGeneral Pediatric
Surgery
Primary & Secondary
Survey
Table 80.1 
 
  Pediatric Trauma Score
*
COMPONENT
+2
+1
−1
Size
≥
20 kg
10- 20 kg
<10	kg
Airway
Normal
Maintainable
Unmaintainable
Systolic BP
≥
90 mm Hg
50- 90 mm Hg
<50	mm	Hg
CNS
Awake
Obtunded/
LOC
Coma/
decerebrate
Open wound
None
Minor
Major/penetrating
Skeletal
None
Closed 
fracture
Open/multiple 
 
fractures
Sum total 
points
*Children with a Pediatric Trauma Score 
≤
6 are at increased risk of mortality and 
morbidity.
BP, Blood pressure; CNS, central nervous system; LOC, loss of consciousness.
From Tepas JJ 3rd, Mollitt DL, Talbert JL, et al. The Pediatric Trauma Score as a 
 
predictor of injury severity in the injured child. 
J Pediatr Surg
. 1987;22:14- 18, 
 
Table 1
, p. 15.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

574 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
trauma (FAST)
 examination or echocardiography. Cardiac tamponade 
is best managed by thoracotomy or pericardial window, although peri
-
cardiocentesis may be a necessary temporizing maneuver (see 
Table	
80.3
).
Early in shock, blood pressure remains normal because of compen
-
satory increases in heart rate and peripheral vascular resistance (
Table	
80.4
). Some individuals can lose up to 30% of blood volume before 
blood pressure declines. Notably, 25% of blood volume equals 20 mL/
kg, which is only 200 mL in a 10- kg child. Loss of >40% of blood volume 
causes severe hypotension that, if prolonged, may be irreversible. Direct 
pressure should be applied to control external hemorrhage. When 
direct pressure does not control hemorrhage, a tourniquet should be 
applied to a proximal pressure point. Blind clamping of bleeding ves
-
sels, which risks damaging adjacent structures, is not advisable.
Cannulating a larger vein, such as an antecubital vein, is usually the 
quickest way to achieve intravenous (IV) access (see 
Chapter 79
). A 
short, large- bore catheter offers less resistance to flow, allowing for 
more rapid fluid administration. Ideally, a second catheter should be 
placed within the first few minutes of resuscitation in a severely injured 
child. If IV access is not rapidly obtainable, an intraosseous (IO) nee
-
dle should be inserted; all medications and fluids can be administered 
intraosseously (see 
Chapter 79
). Other alternatives are central venous 
access using the Seldinger technique (e.g., in the femoral vein) and, 
rarely, surgical cutdown (e.g., in the saphenous vein). Ultrasonography 
may be employed to safely facilitate both peripheral IV placement and 
central venous catheter placement.
Traditionally,	fluids	are	administered	aggressively	early	in	hemor
-
rhagic shock to reverse and prevent further clinical deterioration. Iso
-
tonic crystalloid solution, such as lactated Ringer’s or normal saline (20 
mL/kg), should be infused rapidly. When necessary, repeated crystal
-
loid boluses may be given. Most children are stabilized with adminis
-
tration of crystalloid solution alone; however, if the patient remains in 
shock after boluses totaling 40 mL/kg of crystalloid, packed red blood 
cells should be transfused. Massive transfusion protocols (including 
fresh- frozen plasma) should be initiated early to prevent coagulopa
-
thy,	and	tranexamic	acid	(TXA)	should	be	considered.	When	shock	
persists despite these measures, exploratory surgery to stop internal 
hemorrhage is usually indicated. Emerging literature suggests mod
-
ern trauma techniques for adults, including permissive hypotension, 
hemostatic resuscitation, and damage control surgery, confer similar 
benefits in children.
 
Disability/Neurologic Deficit
Neurologic status is briefly assessed by determining the level of 
consciousness	and	evaluating	pupil	size	and	reactivity.	The	level	of	
consciousness can be classified using the mnemonic 
AVPU
: Alert, 
responsive to Verbal commands, responsive to Painful stimuli, or 
Unresponsive. A 
Glasgow Coma Scale
 (GCS) or Pediatric GCS 
score (see Chapters 79 and 82
) should be assigned to every child 
with	significant	head	trauma	or	neurologic	impairment.	This	scale	
assesses eye opening and motor and verbal responses. In the Pedi
-
atric	GCS,	the	verbal	score	is	modified	for	age.	The	GCS	helps	
categorize neurologic disability, and serial measurements identify 
improvement or deterioration over time. Patients with GCS ≤8 
should undergo endotracheal intubation and supportive mechanical 
ventilation. Importantly, the patient’s pupil size/reactivity and abil
-
ity to move extremities should be quickly assessed before adminis
-
tration of anticholinergics, sedatives, and paralytics in preparation 
for intubation.
The majority of pediatric blunt trauma deaths are accounted for by 
head injuries. Primary direct cerebral injury occurs within seconds of 
the event and is irreversible. Secondary injury is caused by subsequent 
anoxia or ischemia. 
The goal is to minimize secondary injury by ensur
-
ing adequate oxygenation, ventilation, and perfusion and by maintain
-
ing normal cerebral perfusion pressure.
 Focal hemorrhagic lesions (e.g., 
epidural or subdural hematomas) are less common but may require 
immediate neurosurgical intervention (
Fig. 80.3
).
Signs of increased intracranial pressure (ICP), including progressive 
neurologic deterioration and evidence of transtentorial herniation, 
must be treated immediately (see 
Chapter 82
). Hyperventilation low
-
ers the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pa
co
2
), resulting in 
cerebral vasoconstriction, reduced cerebral blood flow, and decreased 
Table 80.3 
 
  Life- Threatening Chest Injuries
TENSION PNEUMOTHORAX
One- way valve leak from the lung parenchyma or tracheobronchial 
tree
Lung collapse with mediastinal and tracheal shift to the side 
 
opposite the leak
Compromises venous return and decreases ventilation of the other 
lung
Clinically, manifests as respiratory distress, unilateral absence of 
breath sounds, tracheal deviation, distended neck veins, tympany 
to percussion of the involved side, and cyanosis
Relieve first with needle aspiration, then with chest tube drainage
OPEN PNEUMOTHORAX (SUCKING CHEST WOUND)
Effect on ventilation depends on size
MAJOR FLAIL CHEST
Usually caused by blunt injury resulting in multiple rib fractures
Loss of bone stability of the thoracic cage
Major disruption of synchronous chest wall motion
Mechanical ventilation and positive end- expiratory pressure required
MASSIVE HEMOTHORAX
Must be drained with a large- bore tube
Initiate drainage only with concurrent vascular volume replacement
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
Beck’s triad:
 1.  Decreased or muffled heart sounds
 2.  Jugular venous distention
 3.  Hypotension (with narrow pulse pressure)
Must be drained
Modified from Krug SE. The acutely ill or injured child. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, 
eds. 
Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics
, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002:97.
Table 80.2 
 
  Differential Diagnosis of Immediately Life- Threatening Cardiopulmonary Injuries
TENSION PNEUMOTHORAX
MASSIVE HEMOTHORAX
CARDIAC TAMPONADE
Breath sounds
Ipsilaterally decreased more than contralaterally
Ipsilaterally decreased
Normal
Percussion note
Hyperresonant
Dull
Normal
Tracheal location
Contralaterally shifted
Midline or shifted
Midline
Neck veins
Distended
Flat
Distended
Heart tones
Normal
Normal
Muffled
Modified from Cooper A, Foltin GL. Thoracic trauma. In: Barkin RM, ed. 
Pediatric Emergency Medicine
, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 1997:325.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 80
 u 
Acute Care of Multiple Trauma 
575
ICP. Brief hyperventilation, targeting an end- tidal CO
2
 goal of 30- 35 
mm Hg, remains an immediate option for patients with acute increases 
in ICP. Prophylactic hyperventilation, or vigorous or prolonged hyper
-
ventilation, is not recommended, because the consequent vasocon
-
striction may excessively decrease cerebral perfusion and oxygenation. 
Mannitol and hypertonic saline lower ICP and may improve survival. 
Because mannitol induces an osmotic diuresis, it can exacerbate hypo
-
volemia and must be used cautiously. Hypertonic saline may be a more 
useful agent for control of increased ICP in patients with severe head 
injury. Neurosurgical consultation is mandatory and will dictate fur
-
ther management, including ICP monitoring and emergent neurosur
-
gical interventions.
 
Exposure and Environmental Control
Full exposure of the patient occurs during the primary survey. Using 
trauma shears, all clothing should be removed to reveal any injuries. 
Cutting clothing is fastest and minimizes unnecessary patient move
-
ment. Children often arrive in the ED mildly hypothermic because of 
their higher body surface area–to–mass ratios. They can be warmed 
with use of radiant heat and heated IV fluids, as necessary. After a thor
-
ough physical exam, the patient should be covered with warmed blan
-
kets with close monitoring of body temperature.
Initial Adjuncts
While the primary survey is being performed, the patient will simultane
-
ously be placed on a cardiac monitor, vitals obtained, and vascular access 
established. Fluid resuscitation can be initiated as soon as access is estab
-
lished. Initial laboratory work generally includes a complete blood count, 
electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, liver function tests, lipase, 
lactate, blood gas, coagulation studies, type and cross match, and uri
-
nalysis.	Per	ATLS,	portable	(single,	anterior-	posterior	view)	radiographs	
of the chest and pelvis should be obtained to screen for life- threatening 
injury and identify potential causes of hemorrhage (e.g., pelvic fracture, 
hemothorax, great vessel injury as suggested by a widened mediasti
-
num).	Finally,	a	FAST	exam	should	be	performed	at	the	bedside	to	assess	
for the presence of free fluid (blood) and guide resuscitation.
 
 
The	FAST	exam	and	extended	FAST	(eFAST)	are	other	adjuncts	to	the	
initial trauma survey. This bedside ultrasound can be performed by 
any trained member of the trauma team to assess for the presence of 
blood or free fluid in the intraperitoneal, pericardial, or pleural space. 
The exam assesses four windows: the right upper quadrant abdominal 
view, the left upper quadrant abdominal view, the suprapubic view, and 
the	subxiphoid	cardiac	view.	The	eFAST	adds	additional	views	of	bilat
-
eral lungs to assess for the absence of lung sliding, which is indicative 
of a pneumothorax. In addition to detection of hemoperitoneum, the 
eFAST	can	identify	findings	that	may	require	emergent	management	in	
an	unstable	patient—such	as	a	pneumothorax	requiring	needle	decom
-
pression or a large pericardial effusion requiring pericardiocentesis.
Although	the	FAST	examination	helps	detect	hemoperitoneum,	the	
variably low sensitivity of this test in children suggests that it should not 
be used alone to exclude intraabdominal injury in patients with a mod
-
erate to high pretest probability for injury (e.g., a patient with elevated 
serum	lipase	or	transaminases).	A	positive	FAST	exam	for	hemoperito
-
neum	requires	further	investigation.	The	FAST	exam	is	most	clinically	
useful in patients who have blunt trauma and are hemodynamically 
unstable or in patients who require immediate operative intervention 
for nonabdominal injuries, because in these cases the performance of a 
CT	scan	will	delay	emergency	surgery.
 
SECONDARY SURVEY
During the secondary survey, the trauma team completes a thorough, 
head- to- toe physical examination to assess for additional injuries. In crit
-
ically ill or hemodynamically unstable patients, emergent interventions 
may delay the secondary survey until the patient has been stabilized.
Head Trauma
Initial management of traumatic brain injuries is discussed earlier. The 
secondary survey of the head should identify and document injuries, 
able 80.4 
 
  Systemic Responses to Blood Loss in Pediatric Patients
SYSTEM
MILD BLOOD LOSS (<30%)
MODERATE BLOOD LOSS (30–45%)
SEVERE BLOOD LOSS (>45%)
Cardiovascular
Increased heart rate; weak, thready 
peripheral pulses; normal systolic 
blood pressure; normal pulse 
 
pressure
Markedly increased heart rate; weak, 
thready central pulses; peripheral pulses 
absent; low normal systolic blood 
pressure; narrowed pulse pressure
Tachycardia followed by bradycardia; 
 
central pulses very weak or absent; 
peripheral pulses absent; hypotension; 
narrowed pulse pressure (or 
undetectable diastolic blood pressure)
Central nervous
Anxiety; irritability; confusion
Lethargy; dulled response to pain
Coma
Skin
Cool, mottled; capillary refill 
 
prolonged
Cyanotic; capillary refill markedly 
 
prolonged
Pale and cold
Urine output
Low to very low
Minimal
None
Adapted from American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma. 
Advanced Trauma Life Support: Student Course Manual,
 10th ed. Chicago: American College of Surgeons; 
2018:196.
Fig. 80.3
 Epidural hematoma. CT head scan from 7- mo- old female 
who, according to the history provided, did not wake up for her nightly 
 
feeding and began vomiting in the morning. The mother’s friend 
 
reported that the infant had fallen from a chair the previous day. The CT 
scan shows a large epidural hematoma on the right and marked shift of 
the midline from right to left. The right lateral ventricle is compressed 
as a result of the mass effect, and the left lateral ventricle is slightly 
prominent. The infant underwent emergency surgical evacuation of the 
epidural hematoma and recovered uneventfully. (
From O’Neill JA Jr. 
Principles of Pediatric Surgery, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2003:191.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

576 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
including scalp hematomas and lacerations. The skull and face should 
be carefully palpated to assess for possible fractures. Findings sugges
-
tive of basilar skull fractures include bruising around the eyes (“rac
-
coon eyes”), bruising over the mastoid process (Battle sign), and blood 
behind the tympanic membrane (hemotympanum). The eyes should 
be assessed for conjunctival hemorrhages, hyphemas, and corneal 
injuries. Limitation in extraocular movements may suggest orbital 
fractures with muscle entrapment. The nares should be inspected for 
bleeding and presence of a nasal septal hematoma, which must be evac
-
uated urgently to prevent permanent disfigurement. The mouth should 
be assessed for injuries to the tongue, teeth, gums, palate, and orophar
-
ynx; normal jaw mobility should be ensured. Patients with suspected 
head	or	facial	injuries	will	typically	undergo	CT	of	the	head,	orbits,	
and/or maxillofacial region.
 
Spinal Trauma
Spinal Immobilization
Initially, spinal injury should be suspected in any child sustaining mul
-
tiple	blunt	trauma.	To	prevent	further	spinal	injury,	paramedics	have	
traditionally been taught to immobilize the C- spine in neutral position 
with a stiff collar, head blocks, and tape or cloth placed across the fore
-
head.	To	immobilize	the	rest	of	the	spine,	the	child	is	typically	placed	
on a rigid backboard, and straps or tape are placed across the torso 
and thighs to restrain them. Care should be taken to continue spinal 
immobilization during initial evaluation and resuscitation until spinal 
injury can be excluded (see 
Chapter 81
).
 
C- Spine Trauma
Cervical	spine	injuries	occur	in	<3%	of	children	with	blunt	trauma—
with the risk being substantially higher in those with GCS scores 
≤
8—
but they are associated with significant mortality and morbidity (see 
Chapter 81
). Bony injuries occur mainly from C1 to C4 in children 
younger than 8 years. In older children, they occur equally in the upper 
and lower cervical spine. The mortality rate is significantly higher in 
patients with upper C- spine injuries, and 
∼
30% of all patients with 
C- spine injuries have permanent neurologic deficits.
 
Evaluation
Evaluation begins with a detailed history and neurologic examination. 
Identifying the mechanism of injury helps in estimating the likelihood 
of a spinal injury. Both the patient and the paramedic should be asked 
whether any neurologic symptoms or signs, such as weakness or abnor
-
mal sensation, were present before arrival in the ED. The spine should 
then be examined while maintaining immobilization. If no other dis
-
tracting injuries are present (e.g., a displaced femur fracture), the col
-
lar can be carefully removed by one provider while a second provider 
manually stabilizes the neck. The C- spine should be palpated to assess 
for tenderness or step- offs. If the patient has neck pain, has neurologic 
symptoms, or is unable to participate in the exam, the collar should be 
replaced	immediately.	To	assess	the	thoracic	and	lumbar	spine,	mul
-
tiple providers are required to log- roll the patient and maintain spi
-
nal immobilization. A third provider will palpate the spine, assess for 
cutaneous injuries, and evaluate rectal tone. Before rolling the patient 
back to the supine position, the backboard must be removed to prevent 
further injury or patient discomfort.
Whenever the history, physical examination, or mechanism of 
injury suggests a spinal injury, imaging must be obtained after initial 
resuscitation. Depending on clinical suspicion, mechanism of injury, 
and the patient’s symptoms and physiologic status, the provider may 
elect	either	radiography,	CT,	or	MRI	as	the	initial	imaging	modality.
The 
National Emergency X- Radiography Utilization Study 
(NEXUS)
 cervical spine rule helps identify low- risk patients who 
may not require radiographs (
Table	80.5
). The standard series of plain 
radiographs includes lateral, anteroposterior (AP), and odontoid views. 
Some	centers	use	C-	spine	CT	as	the	primary	diagnostic	tool,	particu
-
larly in patients with abnormal GCS scores or significant injury mecha
-
nisms,	recognizing	that	CT	is	more	sensitive	in	detecting	bony	injury	
than	plain	radiographs.	CT	is	also	helpful	if	an	odontoid	fracture	is	
suspected, because young children typically do not cooperate enough 
to obtain an open- mouth (odontoid) radiographic view. Use of cervical 
spine	CT	scan	must	be	balanced	with	the	knowledge	that	CT	exposes	
thyroid tissue to 90- 200 times the amount of radiation from plain films.
 
SCIWORA
In a child with neurologic symptoms and normal findings on C- spine 
plain	radiographs	and	CT	scan,	
spinal cord injury without radio
-
graphic abnormalities (SCIWORA)
 must be considered. MRI of the 
spine is indicated in a child with suspected SCIWORA and in the eval
-
uation of children who remain obtunded.
 
Thoracic Trauma
Pulmonary contusions
 occur frequently in young children with blunt 
chest trauma. A child’s chest wall is relatively pliable; therefore less 
force is absorbed by the rib cage and more is transmitted to the lungs. 
Respiratory distress may be noted initially or may develop during the 
first 24 hours after injury.
Rib fractures
 result from significant external force. They are noted 
in patients with more severe injuries and are associated with a higher 
mortality rate. Flail chest, which is caused by multiple rib fractures, 
is rare in children. 
Table	80.6
 lists indications for operative manage
-
ment in thoracic trauma. (See 
Table	80.2
 for the differential diagnosis 
of immediately life- threatening cardiopulmonary injuries.) Thoracic 
trauma	can	be	investigated	via	chest	radiograph	or	CT,	depending	on	
the patient’s symptoms, physical exam findings, mechanism of injury, 
and index of suspicion for injury.
 
Abdominal Trauma
Liver and spleen contusions, hematomas, and lacerations account for 
the majority of intraabdominal injuries from blunt trauma. The kid
-
neys, pancreas, and duodenum are relatively spared because of their 
retroperitoneal location. Pancreatic and duodenal injuries are more 
common after a bicycle handlebar impact or a direct blow to the 
abdomen.
Although a thorough examination for intraabdominal injuries is 
essential, achieving it often proves difficult. Misleading findings can 
result from gastric distention after crying or in an uncooperative tod
-
dler. Calm reassurance, distraction, and gentle, persistent palpation 
help with the examination. Important findings include distention, 
bruises, and tenderness. Specific symptoms and signs give insight 
into the mechanism of injury and the potential for particular injuries. 
Pain in the left shoulder may signify splenic trauma. A lap belt mark 
across the abdomen raises concern for bowel or mesentery injury. The 
presence of certain other injuries, such as lumbar spinal fractures and 
femur fractures, increases the likelihood of intraabdominal injury.
An	abdominal	(and	pelvic)	CT	scan	with	IV	contrast	medium	
enhancement rapidly identifies structural abnormalities and is the pre
-
ferred	study	in	a	stable	child.	A	negative	abdominal	CT	scan	has	been	
shown to have a negative predictive value (NPV) of 99.6%. It has excel
-
lent sensitivity and specificity for splenic (
Fig. 80.4
), hepatic (
Fig. 80.5
), 
and renal injuries, but is less sensitive for diaphragmatic, pancreatic, 
or intestinal injuries. Small amounts of free fluid or air or a mesenteric 
Table 80.5 
 
  National Emergency X- Radiography 
 
Utilization Study (NEXUS) to Rule Out 
 
Cervical Spine Injury After Blunt Trauma
If
 
NONE
 
of the following is present, the patient is at very low risk for 
clinically significant cervical spine injury:
Midline cervical tenderness
Evidence of intoxication
Altered level of alertness
Focal neurologic deficit
Distracting painful injury
Data from Hoffman JR, Mower WR, Wolfson AB, et al. Validity of a set of clinical criteria 
to rule out injury to the cervical spine in patients with blunt trauma. 
N Engl J Med
. 
2000;343:94- 99; and Viccellio P, Simon H, Pressman BD, et al. A prospective multicenter 
study of cervical spine injury in children. 
Pediatrics
. 2001;108:e20.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 80
 u 
Acute Care of Multiple Trauma 
577
hematoma may be the only sign of an intestinal injury. Administration 
of an oral contrast agent is not routinely recommended for all abdomi
-
nal	CT	scans,	but	it	sometimes	aids	in	identifying	an	intestinal,	espe
-
cially a duodenal, injury.
Nonoperative treatment has become standard for hemodynami
-
cally stable children with splenic, hepatic, and renal injuries from blunt 
trauma. The majority of such children can be treated nonsurgically. In 
addition to avoiding perioperative complications, nonoperative treat
-
ment decreases the need for blood transfusions and shortens hospi
-
tal stay. When laparotomy is indicated, splenic repair is preferable to 
splenectomy.
 
Pelvic Trauma
Pelvic fractures in children are much less common than in adults, 
occurring in approximately 4% of children with more severe blunt 
trauma. Pelvic fractures are typically caused by high forces (e.g., high- 
speed motor vehicle crashes or pedestrian impacts) and are often asso
-
ciated with intraabdominal and/or vascular injuries. The pelvis itself 
forms a ring, and high- force impacts can lead to disruption of this ring. 
When the ring is disrupted in more than one location, such as the sym
-
physis pubis and the sacroiliac joint, the ring can become unstable and 
displaced, potentially injuring large pelvic vessels and leading to mas
-
sive blood loss. Catheter- directed embolization to control bleeding, 
performed by an interventional radiologist, may be required.
The pelvis should be assessed for stability by means of compression- 
distraction maneuvers. If instability is noted, immediate external fixa
-
tion with a pelvis- stabilizing device or a sheet should be applied and 
orthopedic consultation sought. A trauma patient with a potential 
pelvic fracture should receive an AP pelvic radiograph in the trauma 
bay	followed	by	a	CT	scan	if	there	is	still	suspicion	of	injury.	Children	
without
 a high- risk clinical finding (e.g., GCS <14; abdominal pain 
or tenderness; pelvic tenderness, laceration, ecchymosis, or abrasion; 
gross hematuria or >20 red blood cells/high- power field on urinaly
-
sis; or femur fracture) or a high- risk mechanism of injury (e.g., unre
-
strained motor vehicle collision, motor vehicle collision with ejection, 
motor vehicle collision rollover, auto vs pedestrian, or auto vs bicycle), 
however, are unlikely to have pelvic fractures.
 
Genitourinary Trauma
The perineum should be inspected and the stability of the bones of the 
pelvis assessed. Urethral injuries are more common in males. Findings 
suggestive of urethral injury include scrotal or labial ecchymosis, blood 
at the urethral meatus, gross hematuria, and a superiorly positioned 
prostate on rectal examination (in an adolescent male). Certain pelvic 
fractures also increase the risk for potential genitourinary injury. Any 
of these findings is a contraindication to urethral catheter insertion 
and warrants consultation with a urologist. Retrograde urethrocysto
-
gram	and	CT	scan	of	the	pelvis	and	abdomen	are	used	to	determine	
the extent of injury.
 
Extremity Trauma
Thorough examination of the extremities is essential because extremity 
fractures are among the most frequently overlooked injuries in chil
-
dren with multiple traumas. All limbs should be inspected for defor
-
mity, swelling, and bruises; palpated for tenderness; and assessed for 
active and passive range of motion, sensory function, and perfusion.
able 80.6 
 
  Indications for Operation in Thoracic Trauma
THORACOTOMY IMMEDIATELY OR SHORTLY AFTER INJURY
Massive continuing pneumothorax or large air leak from 
 
tracheobronchial injury (cannot expand lung and ventilate)
Cardiac tamponade
Open pneumothorax
Esophageal injury
Aortic or other vascular injury
Acute rupture of the diaphragm
DELAYED THORACOTOMY OR THORACOSCOPY
Chronic rupture of the diaphragm
Clotted hemothorax
Persistent chylothorax
Traumatic intracardiac defects
Evacuation of large foreign bodies
Chronic atelectasis from traumatic bronchial stenosis
Modified from O’Neill JA Jr. 
Principles of Pediatric Surgery,
 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 
2003:157.
Fig. 80.4
 Splenic rupture. CT scan with intravenous and gastrointes
-
tinal contrast enhancement shows an isolated splenic rupture that re
-
sulted from blunt trauma. This injury responded to nonoperative man
-
agement, as do most splenic injuries. (
From O’Neill JA Jr. Principles of 
Pediatric Surgery, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2003:166.
)
Fig. 80.5
 Liver injury. CT scan performed after severe blunt injury 
of the abdomen shows a bursting injury of the liver. The patient was 
stable, and no operative intervention was required. The decision to 
perform surgery should be based on the patient’s physiologic stability. 
(
From O’Neill JA Jr. Principles of Pediatric Surgery, 2nd ed. St Louis: 
Mosby; 2003:168.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

578 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Before radiographs are obtained, suspected fractures and disloca
-
tions should be immobilized and an analgesic administered. Splinting 
a femur fracture helps alleviate pain and may decrease blood loss. An 
orthopedic surgeon should be consulted immediately to evaluate chil
-
dren with compartment syndrome, neurovascular compromise, open 
fracture, or traumatic amputations.
An acute extremity compartment syndrome is a surgical emergency 
usually associated with extremity fractures (e.g., tibia, supracondylar 
humerus, distal radius) but has also been noted after thermal and elec
-
tric injuries, rhabdomyolysis, coagulopathies, or nephrotic syndrome. 
Manifestations include pain out of proportion to the injury, pain with 
passive stretching of the muscles, poor distal pulses, pallor, paresthesia, 
and weakness. In children, escalating pain not relieved by pain medi
-
cations, anxiety, and agitation are additional features. If needed, com
-
partmental pressure should be measured (normal is 8 mm Hg in adults, 
10- 15 mm Hg in children). Absolute pressure 
≥
30 mm Hg is one indi
-
cation for fasciotomy. Another indication for fasciotomy is a diastolic 
blood pressure minus compartment pressure <30 mm Hg.
 
Advanced Imaging
After completion of the primary survey, diagnostic adjuncts, and 
secondary survey, most stable trauma patients will require advanced 
imaging	with	CT	or	additional	plain	radiographs.	As	detailed	earlier,	
injury mechanism, patient history, and clinical exam findings will help 
determine the specific imaging to be obtained. Additionally, clinical 
prediction rules have been developed to identify those at low risk of 
injury for whom specific imaging studies may not be necessary. The 
NEXUS C- spine rule is a sensitive, easily applicable rule that was vali
-
dated for adults and children, although there were fewer young patients 
studied (see 
Table	80.5
). Several clinical prediction rules have been 
developed to identify children at low risk of traumatic brain injury in 
whom	head	CT	can	be	safely	avoided	(
Table	80.7
). Another clinical 
prediction rule has been developed to identify children at very low 
risk of clinically important intraabdominal injuries after blunt trauma 
(
Table	80.8
). Although this rule has an NPV of 99.9%, it needs to be 
externally validated before widespread implementation. One benefit 
of standardizing the evaluation of patients with major trauma is that 
fewer decisions need to be made on an individual basis, possibly expe
-
diting ED management.
 
DISPOSITION
Disposition from the ED trauma bay is determined by several fac
-
tors. Patients who are critically unstable with suspected internal hem
-
orrhage are emergently transferred to the operating room (OR) for 
exploratory surgery before advanced imaging. Up to 30% of children 
evaluated for trauma require hospitalization. Of the children admitted 
for trauma, 30% have operative injuries identified on the physical exam 
or advanced imaging and undergo surgery during that hospitalization. 
Of those requiring surgery, 25% will require surgery within 24 hours 
of admission, and of that group, 57% require emergent intervention. 
Nonoperative patients who are critically injured will ultimately benefit 
from continued management in an ICU capable of caring for children 
and in a facility with the necessary surgical subspecialists.
 
PSYCHOLOGIC AND SOCIAL SUPPORT
Serious multisystem trauma may result in significant long- term psy
-
chologic and social difficulties for the child and family, particularly 
when there is a major head injury. Like adults, children are at risk 
for depressive symptoms and posttraumatic stress disorder. Care
-
givers face persistent stress and have been noted to have more psy
-
chologic symptoms. Psychologic and social support, during the 
resuscitation period and afterward, is extremely important. Parents 
often prefer to be offered the choice to be present during resuscita
-
tions. A member of the resuscitation team should be made respon
-
sible for answering the family’s questions and supporting them in 
the trauma room.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Table 80.8 
 
  Prediction Rule for Identification of Children 
 
at Very Low Risk of Clinically Important 
 
Intraabdominal Injuries After Blunt Trauma
If
 
NONE
 
of the following is present, the patient is at very low risk for 
clinically significant intraabdominal injury:
Glasgow	Coma	Scale	score	<14
Vomiting
Evidence of thoracic wall trauma
Decreased breath sounds
Evidence of abdominal wall trauma or seatbelt sign
Abdominal pain
Abdominal tenderness
Modified from Holmes JF, Lillis K, Monroe D, et al. Identifying children at very low risk of 
clinically important blunt abdominal injuries. 
Ann Emerg Med
. 2013;62:107- 116, e2.
Table 80.7 
 
  Prediction Rule for Identification of Children 
at Very Low Risk of Clinically Important Brain 
Injuries After Head Trauma
Children <2 yr old are at very low risk of clinically important traumatic 
brain injury if they have
 
NONE
 
of the following:
Severe mechanism of injury
History	of	LOC	>5	sec
GCS 
≤
14 or other signs of altered mental status
Not acting normally per parent
Palpable skull fracture
Occipital/parietal/temporal scalp hematoma
Children 2- 18 yr old are at very low risk of clinically important 
traumatic brain injury if they have
 
NONE
 
of the following:
Severe mechanism of injury
History of LOC
History of vomiting
GCS 
≤
14 or other signs of altered mental status
Severe headache in the ED
Signs of basilar skull fracture
LOC, Loss of consciousness; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale score; ED, emergency 
 
department.
Modified from Kuppermann N, Holmes JF, Dayan PS, et al. Identification of children 
at very low risk of clinically- important brain injuries after head trauma: A prospective 
cohort study. 
Lancet
. 2009;374:1160- 1170.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 81
 u 
Spinal Cord Injuries in Children 
579
See also 
Chapter 751.
Compared with adults, spine and spinal cord injuries are rare in 
children, particularly young children, because of both anatomic differ
-
ences and etiologies of injury. The main mechanisms of injury to the 
spine are motor vehicle crashes, falls, sports, and violence, which affect 
young children less often (see 
Chapter 80
).
Several	anatomic	differences	affect	the	pediatric	spine.	The	head	
of a young child is larger relative to body mass than in adults, 
and the neck muscles are still underdeveloped, which places the 
fulcrum	of	movement	higher	in	the	spine.	Therefore	children	<9	
years old have a higher percentage of injuries in the upper cervical 
spine	(C-	spine)	than	do	older	children	and	adults.	The	spine	of	a	
small child also is very mobile, with pliable bones and ligaments, so 
fractures of the spine are exceedingly rare. However, this increased 
mobility	is	not	always	a	positive	feature.	Transfer	of	energy	leading	
to spinal distortion may not affect the structural integrity of the 
bones and ligaments of the spine but can still lead to significant 
injuries	of	the	spinal	cord.	This	phenomenon	of	
spinal cord injury 
without radiographic abnormalities (SCIWORA)
 is more com
-
mon in children than in adults (see 
Chapter 80
).	The	term	is	rela
-
tively outdated, because almost all injuries are detectable by MRI, 
but is still clinically useful when referring to spinal cord injuries 
evaluated	by	plain	radiographs	or	CT.	There	seem	to	be	two	dis
-
tinct	forms	of	SCIWORA.	The	
infantile
 form involves severe injury 
of the cervical or thoracic spinal cord; these patients have a poor 
chance of complete recovery. In older children and adolescents, 
SCIWORA is more likely to be a less severe injury, with a high like
-
lihood	of	complete	recovery	over	time.	The	
adolescent
 form, also 
called 
transient neurapraxia,
 is assumed to be a spinal cord concus
-
sion or mild contusion, as opposed to the severe spinal cord injury 
related to the mobility of the spine in small children.
Although the mechanisms of spinal cord injury in children include 
birth trauma, falls, and child abuse, the major cause of morbidity and 
mortality across all ages remains 
motor vehicle injuries
. Adolescents 
incur spinal cord injuries with epidemiology similar to that of adults, 
including significant male predominance and a high likelihood of frac
-
ture dislocations of the lower cervical spine or thoracolumbar region. 
In infants and children <5 years old, fractures and mechanical disrup
-
tion of spinal elements are more likely to occur in the upper cervical 
spine between the occiput and C3. Certain conditions predispose to 
C- spine injury (
Table	81.1
).
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
One in three patients with significant trauma to the spine and spi
-
nal cord will have a concomitant severe head injury, which makes 
early diagnosis challenging. For these patients, clinical evaluation 
may be difficult. Patients with a potential spine injury need to be 
maintained in a protective environment, such as a collar, until the 
spine can be cleared by clinical and/or radiographic means. A care
-
ful neurologic examination is necessary for infants with suspected 
spinal cord injuries. Complete spinal cord injury will lead to 
spinal 
shock
 with early areflexia (see 
Chapter 751
). Severe C- spine inju
-
ries will usually lead to paradoxical respiration in patients who are 
breathing spontaneously. 
Paradoxical respiration
 occurs when the 
diaphragm, which is innervated by the phrenic nerves with con
-
tributions from C3, C4, and C5, is functioning normally, but the 
intercostal musculature innervated by the thoracic spinal cord is 
paralyzed. In this situation, inspiration fails to expand the chest 
wall but distends the abdomen. Other complications during the 
acute (2- 48 hours) phase include autonomic dysfunction (bradyar
-
rhythmias and tachyarrhythmias, orthostatic hypotension, hyper
-
tension), temperature instability, thromboembolism, dysphagia, 
and bowel/bladder dysfunction.
The	
mildest
 injury to the spinal cord is 
transient quadriparesis
 
evident for seconds or minutes with complete recovery in 24 hours. 
This	injury	follows	a	concussion	of	the	cord	and	is	most	frequently	
seen in adolescent athletes. If their imaging is normal, these chil
-
dren can generally return to normal activities after a period of rest 
from days to weeks, depending on the initial severity, similar to 
cerebral concussion management.
Significant spinal cord injury in the cervical region is charac
-
terized by flaccid quadriparesis, loss of sphincter function, and a 
sensory level corresponding to the level of injury. An injury at the 
high cervical level (C1- C2) can cause respiratory arrest and death 
in the absence of ventilatory support. Injuries in the thoracic region 
are	generally	the	result	of	fracture	dislocations.	They	may	produce	
paraplegia	when	at	T10	or	above	or	the	
conus medullaris syndrome
 
if	at	the	T12-	L1	level.	This	includes	a	loss	of	urinary	and	rectal	
sphincter control, flaccid weakness, and sensory disturbances of the 
legs. A 
central cord lesion
 may result from contusion and hemor
-
rhage in the center of the spinal cord (
Fig. 81.1
). It typically involves 
the upper extremities to a greater degree than the legs because the 
motor fibers to the cervical and thoracic region are more centrally 
located	in	the	spinal	cord.	There	are	lower	motor	neuron	signs	in	the	
upper extremities and upper motor neuron signs in the legs, blad
-
der	dysfunction,	and	loss	of	sensation	caudal	to	the	lesion.	There	
may be considerable recovery, particularly in the lower extremities, 
although sequelae are common (see 
Chapter 751
).
 
CLEARING THE CERVICAL SPINE IN CHILDREN
The	management	of	children	after	major	trauma	is	challenging.	
For older children, the clearance is similar to a lucid adult, and the 
National Emergency X- Radiography Utilization Study (NEXUS) 
criteria are appropriate (see 
Chapter 80
, 
Table	80.5
). Clearing the 
cervical spine in younger and uncooperative children involves 
similar issues as in adults with an altered level of consciousness 
 
Chapter 
81
Spinal Cord Injuries in 
Children
Katie P. Fehnel and Mark R. Proctor
Table 81.1 
 
  Conditions that Predispose Patients to a 
 
Cervical Spine Injury
CATEGORY
CONDITIONS
Abnormal development of 
the cervical spine
Trisomy 21
Larsen syndrome
Mucopolysaccharidosis IV/Morquio 
syndrome
Klippel- Feil syndrome
Achondroplasia
Chiari malformation
Syringomyelia
Abnormal bone and soft 
tissue
Marfan syndrome
Ehlers- Danlos syndrome
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
History of cervical spine 
injury or surgery
Modified from McCollum M, Guse S. Neck trauma: Cervical spine, seatbelt sign and 
penetrating palate injuries. 
Emerg Med Clin N Am
. 2021;39:573- 588, 
Table 1
, p. 574.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

580 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
(
Table	81.2
). Small children generally have a difficult- to- assess 
physical examination, and it is difficult to determine if they have 
cervical pain. Plain radiography remains a mainstay for assessing 
the	spine	because	it	is	easy	to	obtain.	There	has	been	increasing	
emphasis on MRI for evaluation of potential C- spine instability, 
but in small children MRI requires sedation and in most centers 
the presence of an anesthesiologist (
Fig. 81.2
).	CT	scan	is	another	
important study with high sensitivity and specificity, but the risk of 
radiation exposure must be considered.
In addition to C- spine injury, neck trauma may also produce a radic
-
ulopathy or neuropathy (
Table	81.3
).
 
TREATMENT
The cervical spine should be immobilized in the field by the emer
-
gency medical technicians. In cases of acute spinal cord injury, weak 
data suggest acute infusion of a bolus of high- dose (30 mg/kg) meth
-
ylprednisolone, followed by a 23- hour infusion (5.4 mg/kg/hr). 
The 
data for this treatment are controversial; the current neurosurgical 
guidelines for management of adult spine trauma do not recom
-
mend methylprednisolone; corticosteroids have not been specifically 
tested in children. 
As such, many centers no longer use them routinely
. 
Maintenance of euvolemia and normotension is important, and vaso
-
pressors might be needed if the sympathetic nervous system has been 
compromised.
Surgical management of spinal injuries must be tailored to the 
patient’s age but can be a crucial step in management. Any compression 
of the spinal cord must be surgically relieved to afford the best chance 
of a favorable outcome. In addition, spinal cord injury can be worsened 
by instability, so surgical stabilization can prevent further injury (
Fig. 
81.3
). In general, younger children have a higher healing capacity for 
bones and ligaments, and external immobilization might be considered 
for injuries that require surgery in older children and adults. However, 
some injuries are highly unstable and always require surgery. 
Occipi
-
tocervical dislocation
 is one such highly unstable injury, and early 
surgery with fusion from the occiput to C2 or C3 should be performed, 
even in very young children. Fixation of the subaxial spine must be 
tailored to the size of the pedicles and other osseous structures of the 
developing axial skeleton.
 
ParaplegiaQuadriplegiaCentral CordSyndromeBrown-SéquardSyndrome
ADB
C
Fig 81.1
 Patterns of spinal cord injury. Note the contrast between these syndromes and peripheral nerve/radicular injuries based on the distribu
-
tion of motor and/or sensory loss beyond the affected extremity. 
Paraplegia
 
(A)
 and 
quadriplegia
 
(B)
: Complete loss of motor and sensory function 
below the level of injury resulting in loss of function of the legs only or arms and legs, respectively. 
Central cord syndrome
 
(C)
: Injury of the central 
spinal cord resulting in functional greater impact of arm motor function than legs. Sensory deficits in this injury are variable. 
Brown- Séquard syn
-
drome
 
(D)
: Injury to one- half of the spinal cord resulting in ipsilateral motor weakness with contralateral sensory loss below the level of the lesion. 
(
From Jea A, Belal A, Zaazoue MA, Martin J. Cervical spine injury in children and adolescents. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2021;68:875- 894: 
Fig. 11
, p. 886.
)
Table 81.2 
 
  Risk Factors that Preclude Clinical Clearance 
 
of the C- Spine
HISTORY
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Child or parent reports 
persistent neck pain, 
abnormal head posture, 
or difficulty with neck 
movement
Visible known substantial injury to 
chest, abdomen, or pelvis (injury 
that is life- threatening, warrants 
surgical intervention or inpatient 
admission)
History of focal sensory 
abnormality or motor deficit
GCS	of	<14
High- risk injury
*
Torticollis/abnormal head position
Posterior midline neck tenderness
Limited cervical range of motion
Inability to maintain focus due to 
other injuries
*Diving, high speed motor vehicle crash, bike crash, motorized all- terrain vehicle.
GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale.
Modified from McCollum M, Guse S. Neck trauma: Cervical spine, seatbelt sign and 
penetrating palate injuries. 
Emerg Med Clin N Am
. 2021;39:573- 588, 
Table 2
, p. 575.
Fig. 81.2
 T2- weighted MRI performed the day after the accident 
showed cervical spinal cord swelling combined with high signal inten
-
sity (C1- C3) 
(arrow)
 and dislocation of C5- C6 
(arrowhead).
 (
From Inoue 
K, Kumada T, Fujii T, Kimura N. Progressive cervical spinal cord atrophy 
after a traffic accident. J Pediatr. 2017;180:287: 
Fig. 1
, p. 287.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 82
 u 
Neurologic Emergencies and Stabilization 
581
Table 81.3 
 
  History and Examination Features Allowing for Discrimination of Myelopathy, Radiculopathy, and Peripheral 
 
Neuropathy
FINDING
PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY
RADICULOPATHY
MYELOPATHY
Pain
	•		Quality
	•		Location
“Electric”
Radiates either proximally or distally 
from injury site
Sharp, aching
Radiates distally from the neck
Typically painless
Weakness
Variable, usually present
Variable, usually present
Variable, may be present
Sensory loss
Sharply demarcated borders
Indistinct borders
Indistinct borders, typically extends 
beyond single extremity
Tone/reflexes
Decreased
Decreased
Increased
From Jea A, Belal A, Zaazoue MA, Martin J. Cervical spine injury in children and adolescents. 
Pediatr Clin N Am
. 2021;68:875- 894, 
Table 4
, p. 883.
ABC
Fig. 81.3
 A 15- year- old hockey player suffered acute paraplegia after his head struck the boards during a hockey game. 
A,
 CT scan shows com
-
pression fractures of C4 and C5. 
B,
 MRI shows severe spinal cord contusion. 
C,
 Because of the need to decompress the spinal cord and stabilize the 
spine, anterior and posterior surgery was performed. No meaningful recovery was obtained.
PREVENTION
The most important aspect of the care of spinal cord injuries in children 
is injury prevention. Use of appropriate child restraints in automobiles 
is the most important precaution. In older children and adolescents, 
rules against “spear tackling” in American football and the 
Feet First, 
First Time
 aimed at adolescents diving into swimming pools and natu
-
ral water areas are important ways to help prevent severe cervical spinal 
cord injuries. Safe driving practices, such as using safety belts, avoiding 
distracted driving, and following the speed limit, can have substantial 
beneficial effects on injury rates.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
NEUROCRITICAL CARE PRINCIPLES
The brain has high metabolic demands, which are further increased 
during growth and development. Preservation of nutrient supply to 
the brain is the mainstay of care for children with evolving brain inju
-
ries. 
Intracranial dynamics
 describes the physics of the interactions of 
Chapter 
82
Neurologic Emergencies 
and Stabilization
Patrick M. Kochanek and Michael J. Bell
the	contents—brain	parenchyma,	blood	(arterial,	venous,	capillary),	
and	cerebrospinal	fluid	(CSF)—within	the	cranium.	Normally,	brain	
parenchyma accounts for up to 85% of the contents of the cranial vault, 
and the remaining portion is divided between CSF and blood. The 
brain resides in a relatively rigid cranial vault, and cranial compliance 
decreases with age as the skull ossification centers gradually replace 
cartilage with bone. The 
intracranial pressure (ICP)
 is derived from 
the volume of its components and the bony compliance. The 
perfu
-
sion pressure
 of the brain (cerebral perfusion pressure [CPP]) is equal 
to the pressure of blood entering the cranium (mean arterial pressure 
[MAP]) minus the ICP, in most cases.
Increases in intracranial volume can result from swelling, masses, 
or increases in blood and CSF volumes. As these volumes increase, 
compensatory mechanisms prevent increases in ICP by (1) decreas
-
ing CSF volume (CSF is displaced into the spinal canal or absorbed 
by arachnoid villi), (2) decreasing cerebral blood volume (venous 
blood return to the thorax is augmented), and/or (3) increasing cranial 
volume (sutures pathologically expand or bone is remodeled). Once 
compensatory mechanisms are exhausted (the increase in cranial vol
-
ume is too large), small increases in volume lead to clinically meaning
-
ful increases in ICP or intracranial hypertension (
Fig. 82.1
). As ICP 
continues to increase, brain ischemia can occur as CPP falls. Further 
increases in ICP can ultimately displace the brain downward into the 
foramen	magnum—a	process	called	
cerebral herniation
, which can 
become irreversible in minutes and may lead to severe disability or 
death; 
Figure 82.2
 notes other sites of brain herniation.
Oxygen and glucose are required by brain cells for normal function
-
ing, and these nutrients must be constantly supplied by cerebral blood 
flow (CBF). Normally, CBF is constant over a wide range of blood pres
-
sures (blood pressure autoregulation of CBF) via actions mainly within 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

582 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
blood viscosity, and other vasoactive mediators (i.e., adenosine, nitric 
oxide, prostanoids) can also affect the cerebral vasculature.
Knowledge of these concepts is instrumental to preventing second
-
ary brain injury. Increases in CSF pH that occur because of inadvertent 
hyperventilation (decreased Pa
co
2
) can produce cerebral ischemia. 
Hyperthermia- mediated increases in cerebral metabolic demands 
may damage vulnerable brain regions after injury. Hypoglycemia can 
produce neuronal death when CBF fails to compensate. Prolonged sei
-
zures can lead to permanent injuries if hypoxemia occurs from loss of 
airway control.
Attention to detail and constant reassessment are paramount in 
managing children with critical neurologic insults. Among the most 
valuable tools for serial, objective assessments of neurologic condition 
is the 
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
 (
Table	82.1
 and see 
Table	79.3
). 
Originally developed to assess level of consciousness after traumatic 
brain	injury	(TBI)	in	adults,	the	GCS	is	also	valuable	in	pediatrics.	
Modifications to the GCS have been made for nonverbal children and 
are available for infants and toddlers (see 
Table	79.3
 in 
Chapter 79
). 
Serial assessments of the GCS score along with a focused neurologic 
examination are invaluable to detect injuries before permanent dam
-
age occurs in the vulnerable brain. The 
FOUR (full outline of unre
-
sponsiveness) score
 (see 
Table	82.1
) is a modification of the GCS, 
which eliminates the patient’s verbal response but adds functional 
assessments of the brainstem (pupil, corneal, and cough reflexes) and 
respiratory pattern.
The most- studied monitoring device in clinical practice is the 
ICP 
monitor
. Monitoring is accomplished by a catheter inserted either 
into the cerebral ventricle (externalized ventricular drain) or into 
brain parenchyma (parenchymal transducer). ICP- directed therapies 
are	standard	of	care	in	TBI	and	are	used	in	other	conditions,	such	as	
intracranial hemorrhage, Reye syndrome, and some cases of encepha
-
lopathy, meningitis, and encephalitis. Other devices being used include 
catheters that measure brain tissue oxygen concentration, external 
probes that noninvasively assess brain oxygenation by absorbance of 
near- infrared light (near- infrared spectroscopy [NIRS]), monitors of 
brain electrical activity (continuous electroencephalography [EEG] 
or somatosensory, visual, or auditory evoked potentials), and CBF 
monitors	(transcranial	Doppler,	xenon	CT,	perfusion	MRI,	or	tissue	
probes).	In	the	severe	TBI	guidelines,	brain	tissue	oxygen	concentra
-
tion monitoring received level III support and thus may be considered 
as an adjunct to ICP- directed therapy.
 
CSFVenous bloodArterialbloodBrainCSFVenousbloodArterialbloodBrain
NormalCompensatedUncompensated
MASS/EDEMAArterialbloodBrainMASS/EDEMA50
ICP (mm Hg)
3010
Fig. 82.1
 The Munro- Kellie doctrine describes intracranial dynamics 
in the setting of an expanding mass lesion (i.e., hemorrhage, tumor) or 
brain edema. In the normal state, the brain parenchyma, arterial blood, 
CSF, and venous blood occupy the cranial vault at a low pressure, gen
-
erally <10 mm Hg. With an expanding mass lesion or brain edema, 
initially there is a compensated state as a result of reduced CSF and 
venous blood volumes, and ICP remains low. Further expansion of the 
lesion, however, leads to an uncompensated state when compensatory 
mechanisms are exhausted and intracranial hypertension results.
12345
Fig. 82.2
 Different forms of brain herniation. 
1,
 Cingulate. 
2,
 Uncal. 
3,
 
Cerebellar tonsillar. 
4,
 Upward cerebellar. 
5,
 Transcalvarial. 
(
From Fish
-
man RA. 
Cerebrospinal Fluid in Diseases of the Nervous System.
 Phila
-
delphia: Saunders; 1980.)
CBFCPP
Lower limitUpper limit
Fig. 82.3
 Schematic of the relationship between CBF and CPP. The 
diameter of a representative cerebral arteriole is also shown across the 
center of the 
y
 axis to facilitate understanding of the vascular response 
across CPP that underlies blood pressure autoregulation of CBF. CPP 
is generally defined as the mean arterial pressure (MAP) minus the ICP. 
At normal values for ICP, this generally represents MAP. Thus, normally, 
CBF is kept constant between the lower limit and upper limit of au
-
toregulation; in normal adults, these values are 
≈
50 mm Hg and 150 
mm Hg, respectively. In children, the upper limit of autoregulation is 
likely proportionally lower than the adult value relative to normal MAP 
for age. However, according to the work of Vavilala et al. (2003), lower 
limit values are surprisingly similar in infants and older children. Thus 
infants and young children may have less reserve for adequate CPP. 
See text for details.
the cerebral arterioles. Cerebral arterioles are maximally dilated at 
lower blood pressures and maximally constricted at higher pressures so 
that CBF does not vary during normal fluctuations (
Fig. 82.3
). Above 
the upper limit of autoregulation, breakthrough dilation occurs that, if 
severe, can produce hypertensive encephalopathy. Acid- base balance of 
the CSF (often reflected by acute changes in arterial partial pressure of 
carbon dioxide [Pa
co
2
]), body/brain temperature, glucose utilization, 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 82
 u 
Neurologic Emergencies and Stabilization 
583
TRAUMATIC BRAIN INJURY
Etiology
Mechanisms	of	TBI	include	motor	vehicle	crashes,	falls,	assaults,	and	
abusive	head	trauma.	Most	TBIs	in	children	are	from	closed-	head	
injuries.
 
Epidemiology
TBI	is	an	important	pediatric	public	health	problem,	with	over	800,000	
emergency department visits, 23,000 hospitalizations, and over 2,500 
deaths in children annually in the United States. It is also 1 of the top 
10 causes of years lost to disability throughout infancy, childhood, and 
adolescence.
 
Pathology
Epidural, subdural, and parenchymal intracranial hemorrhages can 
result. Injury to gray or white matter is also commonly seen and 
includes focal cerebral contusions, diffuse cerebral swelling, axonal 
injury, and injury to the cerebellum or brainstem. Patients with severe 
TBI	often	have	multiple	findings;	diffuse	and	potentially	delayed	cere
-
bral swelling is common.
 
Pathogenesis
TBI	results	in	primary	and	secondary	injury.	Primary	injury	from	the	
impact produces irreversible tissue disruption. In contrast, two types of 
secondary injury are targets of neurointensive care. First, some of the 
ultimate damage seen in the injured brain evolves over hours or days, 
and the underlying mechanisms involved (including edema, apoptosis, 
programmed necrosis, and secondary axotomy) are therapeutic targets. 
Second, the injured brain is vulnerable to additional insults because 
injury disrupts normal autoregulatory defense mechanisms; disruption 
of autoregulation of CBF can lead to ischemia from hypotension that 
would otherwise be tolerated by the uninjured brain.
 
Clinical Manifestations
The hallmark of 
severe TBI
 is coma 
(GCS score 3- 8)
. Coma is often 
seen immediately after the injury and is sustained. In some cases, such 
as with an epidural hematoma, a child may be initially alert on presen
-
tation but may deteriorate after a period of hours. A similar picture 
can be seen in children with diffuse swelling in whom a 
talk- and- die
 
scenario has been described. Clinicians should also not be lulled into 
underappreciating the potential for deterioration of a child with 
mod
-
erate TBI (GCS score 9- 12)
 with a significant contusion, because pro
-
gressive swelling can potentially lead to devastating complications. In 
the	comatose	child	with	severe	TBI,	the	second	key	clinical	manifes
-
tation is the development of 
intracranial hypertension
. The develop
-
ment of increased ICP with impending herniation may be heralded by 
new- onset or worsening headache, depressed level of consciousness, 
vital sign changes (hypertension, bradycardia, irregular respirations), 
and signs of sixth (lateral rectus palsy) or third (anisocoria [dilated 
pupil], ptosis, down- and- out position of globe as a result of rectus 
muscle palsies) cranial nerve compression. Increased ICP is managed 
with continuous ICP monitoring, as well as monitoring for clinical 
signs of increased ICP or impending herniation. The development of 
brain swelling is progressive. Significantly raised ICP (>20 mm Hg) 
can	occur	early	after	severe	TBI,	but	peak	ICP	generally	is	seen	at	48-	
72 hours. Need for ICP- directed therapy may persist for longer than a 
week. A few children have coma without increased ICP resulting from 
axonal injury or brainstem injury. 
In addition to head trauma, it is criti
-
cal to identify potential cervical spine injury
 (see 
Chapter 81
)
.
 
Laboratory Findings
Cranial	CT	should	be	obtained	immediately	after	resuscitation	and	cardio
-
pulmonary stabilization (
Figs. 82.4- 82.10
). In some cases, MRI can be diag
-
nostic (
Fig. 82.11
).	An	approach	to	CT	scanning	is	noted	in	
Figure 82.12
. 
Generally,	other	laboratory	findings	are	normal	in	isolated	TBI,	although	
occasionally coagulopathy or the development of the syndrome of inap
-
propriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) secretion or cerebral salt wasting 
(CSW)	is	seen.	In	the	setting	of	TBI	with	polytrauma,	other	injuries	can	
result in laboratory and/or radiographic abnormalities, and a 
full trauma 
survey
	is	important	in	all	patients	with	severe	TBI	(see	
Chapter 80
).
 
Diagnosis and Differential Diagnosis
In	severe	TBI,	the	diagnosis	is	generally	obvious	from	the	history	and	
clinical	presentation.	Occasionally,	TBI	severity	can	be	overestimated	
because of concurrent alcohol or drug intoxication. The diagnosis of 
TBI	can	be	problematic	in	cases	of	abusive	head	trauma	or	after	an	
anoxic event such as drowning or smoke inhalation.
 
Treatment
Infants	and	children	with	severe	or	moderate	TBI	(GCS	score	3-	8	
or 9- 12, respectively) receive intensive care unit (ICU) monitoring. 
Evidence-	based	guidelines	for	the	management	of	severe	TBI	have	
been published (
Fig. 82.13
 and 
Fig. 82.14
). This approach to ICP- 
directed therapy is also reasonable for other conditions in which 
ICP is monitored. Care involves a multidisciplinary team comprising 
pediatric caregivers from neurologic surgery, critical care medicine, 
surgery, and rehabilitation, among other services, and is directed at 
able 82.1 
 
  Commonly Used Coma Scores
GLASGOW COMA SCALE
Eye Opening
1 = does not open eyes
2 = opens eyes in response to noxious stimuli
3 = opens eyes in response to voice
4 = opens eyes spontaneously
Verbal Output
1 = makes no sounds
2 = makes incomprehensible sounds
3 = utters inappropriate words
4 = confused and disoriented
5 = speaks normally and oriented
Motor Response (Best)
1 = makes no movements
2 = extension to painful stimuli
3 = abnormal flexion to painful stimuli
4 = flexion/withdrawal to painful stimuli
5 = localized to painful stimuli
6 = obeys commands
FULL OUTLINE OF UNRESPONSIVENESS (FOUR) SCORE
Eye Response
4 = eyelids open or opened, tracking, or blinking to command
3 = eyelids open but not tracking
2 = eyelids closed but open to loud voice
1 = eyelids closed but open to pain
0 = eyelids remain closed with pain
Motor Response
4 = thumbs- up, fist, or peace sign
3 = localizing to pain
2 = flexion response to pain
1 = extension response to pain
0 = no response to pain or generalized myoclonus status
Brainstem Reflexes
4 = pupil and corneal reflexes present
3 = one pupil wide and fixed
2 = pupil or corneal reflexes absent
1 = pupil and corneal reflexes absent
0 = absent pupil, corneal, and cough reflex
Respiration
4 = not intubated, regular breathing pattern
3 = not intubated, Cheyne- Stokes breathing pattern
2 = not intubated, irregular breathing
1 = breathes above ventilatory rate
0 = breathes at ventilator rate or apnea
From Edlow JA, Rabinstein A, Traub SJ, Wijdicks EFM. Diagnosis of reversible causes of 
coma. 
Lancet
. 2014;384:2064- 2076.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

584 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
preventing secondary insults and managing raised ICP. Initial stabili
-
zation	of	infants	and	children	with	severe	TBI	includes	rapid	sequence	
tracheal intubation with spine precautions along with maintenance of 
normal extracerebral hemodynamics, including blood gas values (Pa
o
2
 
and Pa
co
2
), MAP, and temperature. Intravenous fluid boluses may be 
required to treat hypotension. Euvolemia is the target, and hypotonic 
fluids must be rigorously avoided; 
normal saline is the fluid of choice
. 
Pressors may be needed as guided by monitoring of central venous 
pressure, with avoidance of both fluid overload and exacerbation of 
brain edema. A trauma survey should be performed. Once stabilized, 
the	patient	should	be	taken	for	CT	scanning	to	rule	out	the	need	for	
emergency neurosurgical intervention. If surgery is not required, an 
ICP monitor should be inserted to guide the treatment of intracranial 
hypertension.	Repeat	CT	scan	may	help	determine	whether	a	new	
lesion requiring surgical intervention has developed; this should be 
obtained if there is a change in examination or for refractory intracra
-
nial hypertension.
During stabilization or at any time during the treatment course, 
patients can present with signs and symptoms of 
cerebral herniation
 
(pupillary dilation, systemic hypertension, bradycardia, extensor 
posturing). Because herniation and its devastating consequences can 
sometimes be reversed if promptly addressed, it should be treated as 
a medical emergency, with use of hyperventilation with a fraction of 
inspired oxygen of 1.0 titrated to reversal of pupillary dilation and 
Fig. 82.4
 Skull fracture. Mildly displaced skull fracture seen on CT im
-
aging (bone window view) in a 4- year- old who fell and hit her head on 
a curb.
Fig. 82.5
 Epidural hematoma. Left frontal epidural hematoma ob
-
served on CT imaging in a 12- year- old child who fell off his bike onto a 
concrete surface.
Fig. 82.6
 Subdural hematoma. Left subdural hematoma observed on 
CT imaging in a 10- year- old child after a motor vehicle accident. Note 
effacement of the left lateral ventricle and midline shift (see 
dashed line
 
for midline reference).
Fig. 82.7
 Subdural hematoma. Hyperacute right frontal subdural he
-
matoma observed on CT imaging in a 5- year- old after a motor vehicle 
accident. Note that the hyperacute aspect of the subdural hematoma is 
dark on CT imaging in the early stage after injury. Also, note that there 
is marked midline shift of intracranial contents, as both lateral ventricles 
are displaced into the left side of the skull.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 82
 u 
Neurologic Emergencies and Stabilization 
585
administration of either hypertonic saline (3% solution, 5- 10 mL/kg 
IV) or mannitol (0.25- 1.0 g/kg IV). 
If an external ventricular drain is 
in place, it should be opened to continuous drainage. Pentobarbital 
administration can also be considered if a prompt clinical response has 
not been observed.
ICP should be maintained at <20 mm Hg; age- dependent CPP targets 
are approximately 50 mm Hg for children 2- 6 years of age, 55 mm Hg for 
those 7- 10 years of age, and 65 mm Hg for those 11- 16 years of age
. 
First- 
tier
 therapy includes elevation of the head of the bed, ensuring mid
-
line positioning of the head, controlled mechanical ventilation, and 
analgesia and sedation (i.e., narcotics and benzodiazepines). If neuro
-
muscular blockade is needed, it may be desirable to monitor EEG con
-
tinuously because 
status epilepticus
 can occur; this complication will 
not be recognized in a paralyzed patient and is associated with raised 
ICP and unfavorable outcome. If a ventricular rather than parenchy
-
mal catheter is used to monitor ICP, therapeutic CSF drainage is avail
-
able and can be provided either continuously (often targeting an ICP 
>5 mm Hg) or intermittently in response to ICP spikes, generally >20 
Fig. 82.8
 Subdural hematoma. In a 3- month- old child who suffered from abusive head trauma, initial CT imaging 
(A)
 demonstrates chronic sub
-
dural hematoma bilaterally. Three days after hospitalization 
(B),
 the subdural hematomas are slightly larger but infarctions are noted in the posterior 
areas of brain parenchyma (
arrows
).
AB
Fig. 82.9
 Hemorrhage and edema. In a 16- year- old who fell from his 
dirt bike, CT imaging demonstrates intraparenchymal hemorrhage and 
significant surrounding edema 
(arrow).
Fig. 82.10
 Skull fractures and hemorrhage. An 11- year- old child was 
hit in the head by a horse, and CT imaging demonstrates multiple com
-
minuted skull fractures with fragments of bone within the brain paren
-
chyma, multifocal areas of intraparenchymal hemorrhage, and oblitera
-
tion of the left lateral ventricle.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

586 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
mm Hg. Other first- tier therapies include the osmolar agents hyper
-
tonic saline or mannitol. Bolus administration of 3% 
hypertonic saline
 
(between
 2 and 5 mL/kg over 10- 20 minutes) has guideline- based level 
II evidence supporting its use to treat ICP spikes >20 mm Hg or using 
a fixed (q4- q6h) dosing interval. It can also be given as a continu
-
ous infusion of 3% saline at 0.1- 1.0 mL/kg/hr. 
Mannitol
 (0.25- 1.0 g/
kg IV over 20 minutes) represents an alternative. These agents can be 
used concurrently. It is recommended to avoid serum osmolality >320 
mOsm/L. A Foley urinary catheter should be placed to monitor urine 
output.
If increased ICP remains refractory to treatment, careful reassess
-
ment of the patient is needed to rule out unrecognized hypercarbia, 
hypoxemia, fever, hypotension, hypoglycemia, pain, and seizures. 
Repeat imaging should be considered to rule out a surgical lesion. 
Guideline- based 
second- tier
 therapies for refractory raised ICP are 
available, but evidence favoring a given second- tier therapy is limited. 
Fig. 82.11
 Hemorrhages and axonal injury. In a 6- year- old child who was hit by a car while riding his bike, initial CT imaging demonstrates no 
obvious abnormality 
(A).
 However, immediate MRI demonstrates multiple areas of punctate hemorrhages (lucencies) consistent with diffuse axonal 
injury 
(
B,
 
arrows).
AB
<2 yrsgreaterequal2 yrs
GCS lessequal 14orSigns of altered mental statusorPalpable skull fractureNoScalp hematomaorLoss of consciousness greaterequal5 secorSevere mechanism of injuryorNot acting normal per parentCT not recommendedNoNoNoYesCTrecommendedYesYesYesObservationvs. CT*CTrecommendedObservationvs. CT**GCS lessequal 14orSigns of altered mental statusorSigns of basilar skull fractureHistory of LOCorHistory of vomitingorSevere mechanism of injuryorSevere headacheCT not recommended* Observation vs. CT based on:• Physician experience
• Multiple vs. isolated findings
• Worsening symptoms in emergency department
• Age <3 months
• Parental preference
** Observation vs. CT based on:  • Physician experience
  • Multiple vs. isolated findings
  • Worsening symptoms in emergency department
  • Parental preference
Fig. 82.12
 Algorithm for head computed tomography (CT) scan using predictive rules. GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; LOC, level of consciousness. 
(Modified from Kupperman N, Holmes JF, Dayan PS, et al. Identification of children at very low risk of clinically important brain injuries after head 
trauma: A prospective cohort study. 
Lancet.
 2009;374:1160- 1170.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 82
 u 
Neurologic Emergencies and Stabilization 
587
Surgery asIndicatedBaseline Carephi1Second Tier Therapyphi1 Note: When ICP-directed care is deemed to berefractory to first tier therapies depends on manyfactors such as the level of ICP, the tempo of
disease progression and others.Carefully weanor withdrawICP, CPP and/orPbrO2 directed therapyNeurologicalexamination mayhelp guide weaning orwithdrawal oftherapy and/orextent of monitoringTo Surgery ifIndicateddelta Based on CVP, urine output, BUN, serum creatinine, fluid balance, and examPsi The timing of instituting first tier therapies depends on many factors such as the level of ICP and the
tempo of disease progression; interventions may need to be bypassed, repeated or initiated concurrently.
* ICP 20-25 for >5 min; more rapidly for ICP >25 mmHg** Mannitol could be substituted
# Monitor EEGMaintain appropriate analgesia/sedationContinue mechanical ventilation; maintain adequate arterial oxygenation; PaCO2 ~35 mmHgMaintain normothermia (<38°C)Ensure appropriate intravascular volume status (CVP)deltaMaintain Hgb >7 g/dL (minimum); higher levels may be optimal based on advanced monitoringTreat coagulopathyElevate HOB 30°Phenytoin or Levetiracetam/Consider continuous EEG monitoring throughout the management courseBegin nutrition as early as feasible and treat hypoglycemiaIf signs and symptoms of herniation
• Pupillary dilation
• Hypertension/bradycardia• Extensor posturingEmergent Treatment:Hyperventilation titrate to reverse pupillary dilation
FiO2 = 1.0Bolus mannitol or hypertonic saline
Open EVD to continuous drainage
Emergency CTarrowdown CPPConfirm appropriateintravascular volumestatus (CVP) deltaVasopressor infusionBolus of hypertonicsaline
arrowdownPbrO2Raise FiO2Cranial CTInsert ICP MonitorTBI (GCS lessequal 8)Herniation PathwayICP PathwayMaintain CPPAppropriate for ageMinim 40 mmHgarrowdown CPP
Vasopressor infusionAdjust PaCO2Optimize HgbarrowdownPbrO2arrowdownPbrO2YesNoarrowup ICP Psi*CSF drainage if ventriculostomy presentBolus and/or infusion of hypertonic saline**Additional analgesia/sedationNeuromuscular blockade #Additional hypertonic saline/hyperosmolar therapyYesNoarrowup ICP Psi*YesNoarrowup ICP Psi*YesNoarrowup ICP Psi*YesNoarrowup ICP Psi*YesNoarrowup ICP Psi*CPP Pathway
Maintain CPPAppropriate for ageMin 40 mmHgPbrO2 Pathway
Fig. 82.13
 Algorithm for use at the bedside to guide first- tier therapies to treat severe pediatric traumatic brain injury (TBI). This evidence-  and 
consensus- based document that accompanied the third edition of the guidelines includes baseline care 
(gray),
 an intracranial pressure (ICP) path
-
way 
(yellow),
 a herniation pathway 
(green),
 a cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) pathway 
(orange),
 a brain tissue partial pressure of oxygen (Pbr
O
2
) 
pathway (purple), and surgical intervention (red). The caregiver should integrate all the available information and implement the evidence in the 
guidelines in the context of each patient’s unique response to therapies to craft the most optimal treatment regimen. Although a linear approach 
in each pathway is provided, variations in tempo and timing during which therapies are implemented will vary from case to case. In some cases, a 
single intervention for raised ICP may suffice, whereas in others, multiple simultaneous interventions may be required. The 
blue box
 indicates the 
need for second- tier therapy (see 
Fig. 82.14
). BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; CVP, central venous 
pressure; EEG, electroencephalogram; EVD, external ventricular drain; Fi
O
2
, fraction of inspired oxygen concentration; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; 
Hgb, hemoglobin; HOB, head of bed; Pa
cO
2
, partial pressure of arterial carbon dioxide; Pa
O
2
, partial pressure of arterial oxygen. 
(From Kochanek 
PM, Bell MJ, Simon DW, et al. Traumatic brain injury. In: Zimmerman JJ, Totta AT, eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 6th ed. Phila
-
delphia: Elsevier; 2022: 
Fig. 118.11
, p. 1391.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

588 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
In some centers, decompressive 
craniectomy
 is used. Others use a 
pentobarbital infusion
, with a loading dose of 5- 10 mg/kg over 30 
minutes followed by 5 mg/kg every hour for 3 doses and then mainte
-
nance with an infusion of 1 mg/kg/hr. Careful blood pressure monitor
-
ing is required because of the possibility of drug- induced hypotension 
and the frequent need for support with fluids and/or pressors. Mild 
hypothermia (32–34°C [89.6–93.2°F]) to control refractory ICP is 
controversial but can be induced and maintained by means of surface 
cooling. Sedation and neuromuscular blockade are used to prevent 
shivering, and rewarming should be slow. Hypotension should be pre
-
vented during rewarming. Refractory raised ICP can also be treated 
with hyperventilation (Pa
co
2
 = 25- 30 mm Hg). Combinations of these 
second- tier therapies are often required.
 
Supportive Care
Euvolemia should be maintained, and isotonic fluids are recommended 
throughout the ICU stay. Either SIADH or CSW can develop and are 
important to differentiate, because management of SIADH is fluid 
restriction and that of CSW is sodium replacement. Severe hyperglyce
-
mia (blood glucose level >200 mg/dL) should be avoided and treated. 
The blood glucose level should be monitored frequently. Early nutri
-
tion with enteral feedings is advocated. Corticosteroids should gener
-
ally	not	be	used	unless	adrenal	insufficiency	is	documented.	Tracheal	
suctioning	can	exacerbate	raised	ICP.	Timing	of	the	use	of	analgesics	
or sedatives around suctioning events and/or use of tracheal or IV 
lidocaine	can	be	helpful.	Seizures	are	common	after	severe	acute	TBI.	
Early posttraumatic seizures (within 1 week) will complicate manage
-
ment	of	TBI	and	are	often	difficult	to	treat.	Anticonvulsant	prophylaxis	
with fosphenytoin or levetiracetam is recommended. Late posttrau
-
matic seizures (
≥
7	days	after	TBI)	and,	if	recurrent,	late	posttraumatic	
epilepsy are not prevented by prophylactic anticonvulsants, whereas 
early posttraumatic seizures are prevented by initiating anticonvulsants 
soon	after	TBI.	Antifibrinolytic	agents	(tranexamic	acid)	reduce	hem
-
orrhage size, as well as the development of new focal ischemic cerebral 
lesions	and	improve	survival	in	adults	with	severe	TBI.
 
Prognosis
Mortality	rates	for	children	with	severe	TBI	who	reach	the	pediatric	
ICU range between 10% and 30%. Ability to control ICP is related to 
patient survival, and the extent of cranial and systemic injuries cor
-
relates with quality of life. Motor and cognitive sequelae resulting from 
severe	TBI	generally	benefit	from	rehabilitation	to	minimize	long-	term	
disabilities.	Recovery	from	TBI	may	take	months	or	years	to	achieve.	
Physical therapy, and in some centers methylphenidate or amantadine, 
helps with motor and behavioral recovery. Pituitary insufficiency may 
be	an	uncommon	but	significant	complication	of	severe	TBI.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
arrowup ICPRefractory to firsttier therapiesSurgery asindicatedNew or expandingsurgical lesionConsider additionaladvanced neuro-monitoring• EEG• TCD• PRx• CBFNOYESSurgical intervention:Remove mass lesion and/ordecompressivecraniectomy1Barbiturateinfusion2Moderatehypothermia332-34°C1Salvageable patient and evidence of expanding mass lesion or swelling on CT2Active EEG and no medical contraindications3No contraindications4Strongly consider advanced neuro-monitoring for ischemia5Advance dose of 3% saline or mannitol, or use bolus 23.4% saline. If possible, avoid serum sodium concentrations of >160 mEq/L and serum osmolarity of >360 mOsm/LHyperventilation428-34 mmHgHigher levels ofosmolar therapy5Repeat CT scan (if surgical option is being considered)
Fig. 82.14
 Bedside algorithm to guide second- tier therapies to treat refractory intracranial hypertension in severe pediatric traumatic brain injury 
(TBI). This evidence-  and consensus- based document that accompanied the third edition of the guidelines represents the treatment options when 
tier 1 approaches are inadequate. These therapies may be applied singly, serially, or in combination. In addition, as shown, management of refractory 
intracranial hypertension in the second- tier phase may be aided by advanced monitoring. CBF, Cerebral blood flow; CT, computed tomography; 
EEG, electroencephalogram; ICP, intracranial pressure; PRx, pressure reactivity index; TCD, transcranial Doppler ultrasonography. (
From Kochanek 
PM, Bell MJ, Simon DW, et al. Traumatic brain injury. In: Zimmerman JJ, Totta AT, eds. 
Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care,
 6th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: 
Fig. 118.12
, p. 1394.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 83
 u 
Brain Death: Death by Neurologic Criteria 
589
Brain death
, also known as 
death by neurologic criteria
, is legally 
and culturally accepted as death in most of the world. In the United 
States, the 
Uniform Determination of Death Act (UDDA)
 defines 
brain death as the irreversible (some use “permanent”) cessation of all 
functions of the entire brain, including the brainstem. The UDDA or 
a similar statute has been adopted in all states. Guidelines for the dec
-
laration of brain death in infants and children were published jointly 
by the Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM), American Academy 
of Pediatrics (AAP), and Child Neurology Society (CNS) in 2011. In 
2020, the World Brain Death Project published a consensus statement 
with recommendations for the minimum clinical standards for deter
-
mination of brain death in adults and children.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Brain death by definition must occur as a result of catastrophic permanent 
global brain injury. Approximately 20% of children who die in pediatric 
intensive care units (PICUs) are declared brain dead. The most common 
etiologies of brain injury leading to brain death are hypoxic- ischemic 
injury from cardiac arrest, shock and/or respiratory failure without cardiac 
arrest, traumatic brain injury, intracranial infections, toxic ingestions, and 
causes of malignant cerebral edema. Mimics of brain death include botu
-
lism, Guillain-Barré syndrome, and high cervical cord injuries.
 
CLINICAL EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS
Brain death is determined by a careful, thorough clinical evaluation. The 
fundamental components of brain death are 
coma
, 
absence of brain
-
stem reflexes
, and 
apnea
. The first step in the brain death evaluation is 
to confirm that the catastrophic brain injury occurred because of an eti
-
ology known to lead to brain death. The next step is to ensure that there 
are no confounding conditions that could mimic or falsely suggest brain 
death. This is done by meticulously ensuring the patient is not hypoten
-
sive or hypothermic; does not have severe metabolic abnormalities like 
hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, or acidosis; and that sufficient time has 
passed to allow for clearance of all sedating medication or other toxins 
that could confound the examination. This involves review of the medi
-
cal history, neuroimaging, electroencephalography (EEG), and labora
-
tory data to rule out reversible causes of coma. Additionally, the patient 
should be observed for a sufficient amount of time (typically at least 24 
hours after CPR or from their severe acute brain injury) to ensure there is 
no recovery of neurologic function. Checklists are very helpful in ensur
-
ing no prerequisites are missed (
Fig. 83.1
). Confounding factors must be 
corrected, if feasible, before initiation of the brain death evaluation. If all 
confounders are unable to be adequately corrected, ancillary testing is 
required to diagnose brain death. Brain death evaluation should not be 
performed in infants <37 weeks corrected gestational age.
Brain Death Neurologic Examination
The clinical examination evaluates for coma; absence of motor responses 
of the head, neck, and extremities; and brainstem areflexia including 
apnea in a setting of an adequate respiratory stimulus. The patient must 
be unresponsive to tactile, auditory, and visual stimulation other than 
spinally mediated reflexes. If it is unclear if motor movements are spi
-
nally mediated, ancillary testing may be necessary before brain death 
can be diagnosed. Brainstem reflexes must be absent. 
Table	83.1
 lists the 
components of the neurologic examination, including brainstem reflexes 
to be tested, the brainstem location of each reflex, and the exam finding 
that is consistent with brain death. Several injuries and conditions can 
preclude completion or interpretation of the clinical examination. These 
include spinal cord injury, orbital/facial trauma, and severe neuromus
-
cular disorders. In these situations, an ancillary test must be performed 
before declaring brain death. It is still necessary to perform all examina
-
tion components that can be completed, and every component assessed 
must be consistent with brain death to allow declaration.
 
Apnea Test
Apnea is the absence of respiratory effort. The purpose of the required 
apnea test is to evaluate whether the chemoreceptors in the brainstem’s 
medulla, which stimulate respiration when exposed to hypercarbia and 
acidosis, are functional. The patient should be euvolemic, normotensive, 
and euthermic before beginning the apnea test. The apnea test can result 
in cardiopulmonary decompensation and should only be performed in 
a PICU by clinicians with skills to stabilize or resuscitate the patient if 
needed. Before the apnea test, the patient is preoxygenated with 100% oxy
-
gen for approximately 10 minutes, and ventilation is adjusted to achieve a 
Pa
co
2
 of approximately 40 mm Hg. A baseline arterial blood gas (ABG) 
documents the starting Pa
co
2
 value. The patient is then removed from 
intermittent mechanical ventilation and provided apneic oxygenation by 
delivering 100% oxygen via continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 
on the ventilator or via flow- inflating resuscitation bag with a functioning 
peak end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) valve. The patient’s hemodynamics 
and pulse oximetry oxygen- hemoglobin saturation (Sp
o
2
) are monitored 
continuously while the physician observes for respiratory effort. An ABG 
sample is obtained approximately 5- 10 minutes into the test and every 2 
minutes thereafter until the target Pa
co
2
 is surpassed; ventilatory support 
is resumed at that time. Absence of respiratory effort with a Pa
co
2
 
≥
60 
mm Hg 
and
 >20 mm Hg above baseline is consistent with brain death. If 
at any point during the test the patient becomes hypoxic (Sp
o
2
 <85%) or 
hypotensive, the test is aborted and ventilatory support resumed.
 
OBSERVATION PERIODS
To	determine	brain	death	in	the	United	States,	current	guidelines	rec
-
ommend the neurologic examination and apnea test be performed by 
different attending physicians separated by an observation period. The 
examination determines that the child has met criteria for brain death. 
An observation period before the examination is based on the patient’s 
age: For infants (≥37 weeks corrected gestational age) and children <24 
months, observe for at least 48 hours. For patients >2 years, observe for 
at least 24 hours.  Before testing, core body temperature should be main
-
tained ≥36° C. In addition in adults, systolic blood pressure (SBP) should 
be ≥100 mm Hg and mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) should be ≥75 
mm Hg; in children SBP and MAP should be ≥5th percentile for age.
Similar MAPs are recommended for patients on venoarterial ECMO. 
Furthermore, before treating metabolic disorders, intoxication and 
effects of therapeutic medications that depress the CNS and periph
-
eral nervous system (paralytics) must be excluded.  In children, two 
different clinicians must perform independent neurological and apnea 
examinations separated by a minimal interval of 12 hours.
 
ANCILLARY STUDIES
Ancillary studies are not required for the diagnosis of brain death and 
should only be used to assist the clinician in declaring brain death (1) when 
components of the neurologic examination or apnea test cannot be com
-
pleted safely because of the underlying medical condition of the patient; 
(2) if there is uncertainty about the results of the neurologic examination; 
(3) if a medication effect may be present; or (4) to reduce the observation 
period between examinations. If an ancillary test is used to shorten the 
observation period, the physician is still required to complete two clinical 
examinations and apnea tests, along with the ancillary study.
The most common ancillary tests are EEG and radionuclide per
-
fusion scintigraphy (or cerebral blood flow) studies. Other tests are 
available (
Table	83.2
); however, these have not been incorporated into 
clinical practice in the United States, although they are used outside of 
the United States in some practice settings. A valid 
electroencephalo
-
gram
 to support a diagnosis of brain death must be performed accord
-
ing to the American EEG Society standards and technical requirements. 
Confounders should be excluded, and the EEG must demonstrate 
Chapter 
83
Brain Death: Death by 
Neurologic Criteria
Matthew P. Kirschen and Wynne Morrison
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

590 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
ChecklistforDocumentationofBrainDeath
BrainDeathExaminationforInfantsandChildrenaAge of PatientInterexamination IntervalTiming of First ExaminationTermnewborn37 weeksgestational ageandupto 30daysoldH17040 Firstexaminationmaybe performed24hoursafterbirthOR followingcardiopulmonaryresuscitation orotherseverebraininjuryH17040 Atleast24hoursH17040 Intervalshortened becauseancillarystudy(Section4) isconsistentwithbraindeath31daysto 18yearsoldH17040 Firstexaminationmaybe performed24hoursfollowing cardiopulmonaryresuscitationorother severebraininjuryH17040 Atleast12hoursORH17040 Intervalshortened becauseancillarystudy(Section4) isconsistentwithbraindeathSection1.PrerequisitesforBrainDeathExaminationandApneaTestA.IrreversibleandIdentifiableCauseofComa(pleasecheck)H17040TraumaticbraininjuryH17040AnoxicbraininjuryH17040KnownmetabolicdisorderH17040Other(specify)____________________B.CorrectionofContributingFactorsThatCanInterferewiththeNeurologicExaminationExamination1Examination2a.Corebodytemperatureis H1102295°F(35°C)H17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040Nob.SystolicbloodpressureorMAPinacceptable range(SystolicBPnotlessthan  2standarddeviations belowage-appropriatenorm)basedonageH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040Noc.Sedative/analgesicdrugeffectexcludedasa contributingfactorH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040Nod.Metabolicintoxicationexcludedas acontributingfactorH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040Noe.Neuromuscularblockadeexcludedas acontributingfactorH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040NoH17040 IfALLprerequisitesaremarkedYES,thenproceedtosection2,ORH17040 ____________________confoundingvariablewaspresent.Ancillarystudywasthereforeperformed todocumentbraindeath(Section4).Section2.PhysicalExamination(pleasecheck);Note:SpinalCordReflexesAreAcceptableExamination1,Date/Time:__________Examination2,Date/T
ime:__________a.Flaccidtone,patientunresponsive todeeppainfulstimuliSection3.Apnea TestExamination1,Date/Time:__________Examination2,Date/Time:__________No spontaneous respiratory efforts were observed despite final PaCO2 H1135060mmHg  and a H1135020mmHg increase above baseline (Examination 1). No spontaneous respiratory efforts were observed despite final PaCO2H1135060mmHg and a H1135020mmHg increase above baseline (Examination 2).Pretest PaCO2: _______Apnea duration: _______ min
Post-test PaCO2: _______Pretest PaCO2: _______Apnea duration: _______ min
Post-test PaCO2: _______H17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040Nob.Pupilsaremidpositionorfullydilated andlightreflexesareabsentH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040Noc.Corneal, cough, gag reflexes are absentH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040Nod.Sucking and rooting reflexes are absent (in neonates and infants)H17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040Noe.Oculovestibular reflexes are absentf.Spontaneous respiratory effort while on mechanical ventilation is absentH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040NoH17040 EEG report documents electrocerebral silence ORH17040 CBF study report documents no cerebral perfusionH17040YesH17040NoH17040YesH17040NoH17040 The __________ (specify) element of the examination could not be performed because ______________________________.Ancillary study (EEG or radionuclide CBF) was therefore performed to document brain death (Section 4).Apnea test is contraindicated or could not be performed to completion because ___________________________.Ancillary study (EEG or radionuclide CBF) was therefore performed to document brain death (Section 4).Section4.Ancillary TestingDate/Time:__________Ancillary testing is required (1) when any components of the examination or apnea testing cannot be completed; (2) if there is uncertainty about the results of the neurologic examination; or (3) if a medication effect may be present. Ancillary testing can be performed to reduce the interexamination period; however, a second neurologic examination is required. Components of the 
neurologic examination that can be performed safely should be completed in close proximity to the ancillary test.Section5.SignaturesExaminer 1I certify that my examination is consistent with cessation of function of the brain and brainstem. Confirmatory examination to follow.Printed name ____________________
Signature ____________________
Specialty ____________________Pager #/license # ____________________
Date mm/dd/yyyy ____________________Time ____________________Examiner 2I certify that my examination H17040 and/or ancillary test report H17040 confirms unchanged and irreversible cessation of function of the brain and brainstem. The patient is declared brain dead at this time.Date/time of death ____________________Printed name ____________________
Signature ____________________
Specialty ____________________Pager #/license # ____________________
Date mm/dd/yyyy ____________________Time ____________________aTwo physicians must perform independent examinations separated by specified intervals.BP = blood pressure; CBF = cerebral blood flow; EEG = electroencephalography; MAP = mean arterial pressure.
Fig. 83.1
 Checklist for documentation of brain death. 
(From Nakagawa TA, Ashwal S, Mathur M, et al. Guidelines for the determination of brain 
death in infants and children: An update of the 1987 Task Force recommendations—executive summary. 
Ann Neurol.
 2012;71:573- 585, 
Table 2.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 83.2 
  Ancillary Tests for Determining Brain Death
TEST
CONFOUNDER/LIMITATION
*
SENSITIVITY/
SPECIFICITY
BRAIN BLOOD FLOW
Computed tomography 
angiography
Requires transport to the scanner
Image variability based on injection technique
Potential to miss a slow flow state
Risk of nephrotoxicity
Not recommended by AAN 2023 Guidelines
#
52–97% / 100%
Digital subtraction 
 
angiography
†
Requires transport to angiography suite
Risk of nephrotoxicity
Image variability based on injection technique
100% / 100%
Magnetic resonance 
 
angiography
Requires transport to the scanner
Image variability based on injection technique
93–100% / 100%
Radionuclide angiography
†
Limited evaluation of brainstem
99% / 56%
Radionuclide scintigraphy
†
Requires transport to the scanner
Planar imaging may have limited evaluation of brainstem
Planar: 78% / 100%
SPECT: 88% / 100%
Transcranial Doppler 
 
ultrasonography
†
Potential for technical difficulties in performance
Potential for lack of windows
90% / 98%
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC FUNCTION
Electroencephalography
Risk of environmental artifact
Confounded by sedation, hypothermia and toxic-metabolic derangements
Predominantly provides information about cortical function
53–80% / 97%
Evoked potentials-auditory
Can be absent in comatose patients with other intact brainstem reflexes
Confounded by sedation, hypothermia, isolated eighth nerve and brainstem lesions
Only evaluates auditory pathways
Performance/interpretation may be limited by experience
NA / NA
Evoked potentials-
 
somatosensory
Can be absent in comatose patients with ongoing brain function
Confounded by cervical spine injury, isolated brainstem lesions, sedation, and hypothermia
Only evaluates somatosensory pathways
Performance/interpretation may be limited by experience
100% / 78%
Evoked potentials-visual
Can be absent in comatose patients with ongoing brain function
Confounded by sedation, retinal or optic nerve lesions
Only evaluates visual pathways
Performance/interpretation may be limited by experience
NA / NA
*Performance/interpretation of all ancillary tests may be limited by experience
†
Accepted by the World Brain Death Project (WBDP).
#
Report of the AAN Guidelines Subcommittee, AAP, CNS, SCCM. Pediatric and adult brain death/death by neurologic criteria consensus guideline. 
Neurology
 2023;101:1-21.
NA, Not available.
From Lewis A, Kirschen MP, Badenes R. Quality improvement in the determination of death by neurologic criteria around the world. 
Crit Care
. 2023;27(1):96.
Table 83.1 
 
 Neurologic Examination to Evaluate a Patient for Brain Death
EXAM COMPONENT
HOW TO PERFORM
RESPONSE CONSISTENT WITH BRAIN DEATH
Coma
Visual response: blink to visual threat
Auditory response: clapping and yelling the child’s name loudly
Tactile response: apply deep pressure to the condyles at the level of 
the temporomandibular joints, the supraorbital notch bilaterally, 
the sternum, and all four extremities proximally and distally
No response to visual or auditory stimuli; noxious 
stimuli do not produce grimacing, facial or body 
muscle movement, or any motor response other 
than spinally mediated reflexes
Pupillary light reflex
(CNs II and III)
Shine a bright light into each eye while closely observing 
 
pupillary size and reactivity
Absence of ipsilateral and contralateral 
 
pupillary response, with pupils fixed in a 
 
midsize or dilated position (4- 6 mm) in both eyes
Corneal reflex
(CNs III, V, VII)
Touch the cornea of each eye with a cotton swab at the external 
border of the iris, applying light pressure and observing for any 
eyelid movement
Absence of eyelid movement
Oculocephalic reflex
(CNs III, VI, and VIII)
Confirm integrity of the cervical spine. Secure the endotracheal 
tube to prevent dislodgement; briskly rotate the head 
horizontally to both sides and observe for movement of the eyes
Absence of movement of the eyes relative to 
head movement; eyes follow the head 
 
movement, staying in mid- position
Oculovestibular reflex
(CNs III, IV, VI, and VIII)
Irrigate the ear canal with 50- 60 mL of ice water for at least 60 sec 
while observing for eye movement; test each side separately 
and with a 5- min interval in between
Absence of eye movement
Gag and cough reflex
(CNs IX and X)
Touch the posterior pharynx with a tongue depressor or a rigid 
suction catheter to stimulate a gag; touch the tracheobronchial 
wall at the level of the carina with placement of a suction 
 
catheter through the endotracheal tube to stimulate a cough
Absence of both cough and gag
Sucking and rooting 
reflexes
Place a gloved finger inside the baby’s mouth to stimulate 
 
sucking; stroke the external surface of both cheeks and 
 
corners of the mouth to stimulate rooting
Absence of sucking and rooting
CN, Cranial nerve.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

592 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
electrocerebral silence
. A 
radionuclide cerebral blood flow study
 con
-
sists of intravenous injection of a radiopharmaceutical agent followed 
by imaging of the brain by planar or single- photon emission computed 
tomography	(SPECT)	imaging.	A	study	that	demonstrates	absence	of	
intracranial blood flow and cerebral perfusion is supportive of brain 
death.	CT	and	MR	angiography	are	not	recommended.
Interpretation of both EEG and cerebral blood flow studies should 
only be performed by trained and qualified individuals. If the study 
shows any evidence of electrical activity or cerebral blood flow, brain 
death cannot be declared. A 24- hour waiting period is recommended 
before repeating the brain death evaluation.
 
DOCUMENTATION
Documentation is an important aspect of the brain death evaluation 
and determination and should follow a checklist, including the follow
-
ing points:
 1. Etiology of brain injury
 2.  Absence of confounding factors, including hypothermia, hypoten
-
sion, metabolic abnormalities, and recent doses of sedative or neu
-
romuscular blocking agents
 3.  Absence of motor response to tactile, auditory, and visual 
 
stimuli
 4.  Absence of brainstem reflexes, including pupillary light reflex, oculoce
-
phalic/oculovestibular reflex, corneal reflex, cough reflex, and gag reflex
 5.  ABG values during the apnea test and statement about respiratory 
effort
 6.  Results of ancillary testing (if indicated)
 
AFTER DECLARATION OF BRAIN DEATH
After brain death has been declared, the child is legally dead
. The time 
of death is the time the final required component of the evaluation 
is completed: either ABG results or ancillary test. Families may be 
approached by representatives of organ procurement organizations 
to discuss options for organ donation after brain death. For families 
that choose not to donate organs, the next appropriate step in the care 
of the child is removal of technologic supports, including mechanical 
ventilation, after which the child’s heart will become asystolic. It is 
important for care providers to be supportive of the family dealing 
with this difficult situation. Child life and palliative care specialists 
can	be	helpful	in	guiding	families	during	this	time.	Technologic	sup
-
port is typically stopped within a few hours of declaring brain death, 
although in some situations it can be delayed at the discretion of the 
physician and in accordance with hospital protocols.
 
OBJECTIONS TO THE CONCEPT OF BRAIN DEATH
The	concept	of	brain	death	may	not	be	accepted	by	families	for	
personal, religious, or cultural reasons. Some families have diffi
-
culty comprehending the fact that their child meets criteria for legal 
death despite having a heartbeat, blood pressure, and being warm 
to the touch. Other families maintain hope for recovery, and some 
have religious views that death can only be declared after cessation 
of cardiorespiratory function. Some individuals have challenged the 
brain death guidelines claiming that they do not sufficiently evalu
-
ate “all functions of the entire brain, including the brainstem,” as 
mandated by the UDDA, particularly as some patients who meet 
brain death criteria continue to show evidence of 
integrative func
-
tioning,
 such as control over free water homeostasis (absence of 
diabetes insipidus), control of temperature regulation, and capacity 
for growth and wound healing. Others argue that the intent of the 
UDDA is met by the current clinical evaluation. Objections to per
-
forming the brain death evaluation or declaration of death should 
be handled by a multidisciplinary team with experience in these sit
-
uations.	These	teams	often	include	physicians,	social	workers,	ethi
-
cists, chaplains, hospital administrators, and lawyers as appropriate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Syncope
 is defined as a sudden transient loss of consciousness with 
inability to maintain postural tone. The most common cause of syncope 
in the normal pediatric population is 
neurocardiogenic syncope
 (vaso
-
vagal syncope, fainting). 
Vasovagal syncope
 is classically associated with 
a prodrome that includes diaphoresis, warmth, pallor, or feeling light
-
headed and is often triggered by acute position changes or by a specific 
situation or event such as pain, medical procedures, or emotional distress 
(
Table	84.1
). This type of syncope is characterized by hypotension and 
bradycardia. Approximately 30–50% of children will have had a 
fainting
 
episode before 18 years of age. The symptoms of vasovagal syncope can 
overlap	with	those	of	postural	orthostatic	tachycardia	syndrome	(POTS),	
a constellation of symptoms characterized by symptoms of rapid heart 
rate and supported by a positional increase in heart rate by 40 beats per 
minute with normal blood pressure (see 
Chapter 84.1
).
Most patients with a vasovagal syncope episode will have prodromal 
features followed by loss of motor tone. Once in a horizontal position, 
consciousness returns rapidly, usually in 1- 2 minutes; some patients 
may have a brief period of stiffening or jerking, which should not be 
confused with a 
seizure
 (
Table	84.2
). Syncope must also be distin
-
guished from 
vertigo
 and 
ataxia
 (
Table	84.3
).
Although this type of syncope is very common in adolescence and 
has an excellent prognosis, other causes for loss of consciousness are 
more dangerous; thus syncope may be the first sign of more serious 
conditions (
Table	84.4
). Indeed, the occurrence of syncope may well 
be the pediatrician’s best opportunity to diagnose a life- threatening 
condition before the patient subsequently succumbs. The task of the 
clinician therefore is not only to counsel the family and the patient con
-
cerning the common form but also to rule out a number of important 
life- threatening cardiac problems.
MECHANISMS
Syncope by whatever mechanism is caused by a lack of adequate cerebral 
blood flow with loss of consciousness and inability to remain upright.
Primary 
cardiac causes
 of syncope (see 
Table	84.4
) include conditions 
that predispose a patient to arrhythmias or conditions such as congeni
-
tal or acquired structural heart disease. Arrhythmic causes of syncope 
include Wolff- Parkinson- White syndrome (particularly with atrial fibril
-
lation),	ventricular	tachycardia	(VT),	and	occasionally	supraventricular	
tachycardia (see 
Chapter 484
).	VT	may	be	associated	with	hypertrophic	
cardiomyopathy (HCM), arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy, repaired con
-
genital heart disease, or an inherited arrhythmia syndrome such as cat
-
echolaminergic	polymorphous	ventricular	tachycardia	(CPVT)	or	long	
QT	syndrome	(LQTS)	(
Table	84.5
). Other arrhythmias that may lead to 
syncope are bradyarrhythmias such as sinus node dysfunction and high- 
grade second-  or third- degree atrioventricular (AV) block. Syncope may 
also be caused by cardiac obstructive lesions, such as critical aortic steno
-
sis, or coronary artery anomalies, such as an aberrant left coronary artery 
arising from the right sinus of Valsalva. Patients with primary pulmonary 
hypertension or Eisenmenger syndrome may also experience syncope. In 
all the obstructive forms of syncope, exercise increases the likelihood of 
an episode because the obstruction interferes with the ability of the heart 
to increase cardiac output in response to exercise.
Noncardiac causes
 of loss of consciousness include epilepsy, basi
-
lar artery migraine, hysterical syncope, and psychogenic nonepileptic 
seizures (see 
Table	84.1
). Occasionally, patients with narcolepsy may 
present with syncope. Hypoglycemia and hyperventilation may also 
present as syncope.
Chapter 
84
Syncope
Aarti S. Dalal and George F. Van Hare
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 84
 u 
Syncope 
593
Table 84.1 
 
  Noncardiac Causes of Syncope
REFLEX VASODEPRESSOR SYNCOPE
Neurocardiogenic (vasovagal)
Emotion (seeing blood)
Pain (needle phobia)
Reflex asystolic syncope (pallid breath- holding)
MISCELLANEOUS SITUATIONAL REFLEX
Tussive
Sneeze
Exercise, after exercise
Swallowing
Stretching
Defecation
Micturition
Hair grooming
Valsalva (increased intrathoracic pressure)
Trumpet playing
Weightlifting
Breath- holding spells (cyanotic)
SYSTEMIC ILLNESS
Hypoglycemia
Anemia
Infection
Hypovolemia, dehydration
Adrenal insufficiency
Narcolepsy, cataplexy
Pulmonary embolism
Pheochromocytoma
Mastocytosis
Ruptured ectopic pregnancy
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Seizure (atonic, absence, myoclonic- astatic)
Hyperekplexia
Stroke, transient ischemic attack
Friedreich ataxia
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
OTHER NEUROLOGIC
Dysautonomia
Myotonic dystrophy
Kearns- Sayre syndrome
Congenital myasthenia gravis
Basilar artery migraine
Arnold Chiari malformation
DRUG EFFECTS
β
- Blocking agents
Vasodilating agents
Opiates
Sedatives
Diuretics
Anticonvulsant agents
Antihistamines
Antidepressant agents
Anxiolytic agents
Drugs of abuse
Insulin, oral hypoglycemic agents
Carbon monoxide
OTHER ETIOLOGIES
Carotid sinus sensitivity
Subclavian steal
Panic attack, anxiety
Conversion disorder
Table 84.2 
 
  Comparison of Clinical Features of Syncope and Seizures
FEATURES
SYNCOPE
SEIZURES
Relation to posture
Common
No
Time of day
Diurnal
Diurnal or nocturnal
Precipitating factors
Emotion, injury, pain, 
crowds, heat, exercise, 
fear, dehydration, 
coughing, micturition, 
venipuncture, 
prolonged standing
Sleep loss, drug/
alcohol withdrawal, 
illness, medication 
nonadherence
Skin color
Pallor
Cyanosis or normal
Diaphoresis
Common
Rare
Aura or premonitory 
symptoms
Often minutes or 
longer, but can be 
very brief
Brief
Convulsion
Rare
Common
Other abnormal 
movements
Minor irregular 
twitching
Rhythmic jerks
Injury
Rare
Common (with 
 
convulsive seizures)
FEATURES
SYNCOPE
SEIZURES
Urinary incontinence
Rare
Common
Tongue biting
No
Common with 
 
convulsive seizures
Postictal confusion
Rare
Common
Postictal headache
No
Common
Focal neurologic 
signs
No
Occasional
Cardiovascular signs
Common to have low 
blood pressure and 
heart rate during 
event; cardiovascular 
exam may be 
completely normal 
after event unless 
there is an underlying 
cardiac disorder
Rare
Abnormal findings 
on EEG
Rare (generalized 
slowing may occur 
during the event)
Common
From Winkel D, Cassimatis D. Episodic impairment of consciousness. In: Jankovic JM, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, Newman NJ, eds. 
Bradley and Daroff’s Neurology in Clinical 
Practice,
 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

594 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
From MacNeill E, Vashist S. Approach to syncope and altered mental status. 
Pediatr Clin N Am
. 2013;60:1083- 1106.
Table 84.4 
 
  Causes of Cardiovascular Syncope: Potentially Fatal If Unrecognized
ARRHYTHMIAS
Bradyarrhythmias
 1.  Sinus node dysfunction (especially in patients with congenital heart 
defects)
 2.  Atrioventricular block (congenital or acquired; Lyme, Fabry, Chagas 
diseases)
 3.  Kearns- Sayre syndrome
 4.  Pacemaker malfunction
Tachyarrhythmias
 1.  Supraventricular
 a.  Wolff- Parkinson- White syndrome
 b.  Supraventricular tachycardia/atrial arrhythmias (especially in 
patients with congenital heart defects)
 2.  Ventricular: ventricular tachycardia/torsades/ventricular fibrillation
 a.  Channelopathies
	•		Long	QT	syndromes
	•		Catecholaminergic	polymorphic	ventricular	tachycardia
	•		Brugada	syndrome
	•		Short	QT	syndrome
 b.  Drug induced
 c.  Idiopathic
	•		Ventricular	fibrillation
	•		Ventricular	tachycardia	from	outflow	tract
]••]bT•bN]N
Cardiomyopathy
 1.  Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
 2.  Dilated cardiomyopathy
 3.  Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia
 4.  Left ventricular noncompaction
Coronary Anomalies
 1.  Anomalous origin
 2.  Kawasaki disease
 3.  Multisystemic inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) secondary 
to SARS-CoV-2
Valvar Aortic Mitral or Pulmonary Stenosis
Takotsubo Disease
Acute Myocarditis
Congenital Heart Disease (Repaired and Unrepaired)
Pulmonary Hypertension, Pulmonary Embolus
Aortic Dissection (Marfan Syndrome)
Cardiac Masses (Myxoma, Rhabdomyoma, Thrombus)
Eisenmenger Syndrome
Table 84.3 
 
  Syncope and Dizziness
VERTIGO
PRESYNCOPE
DISEQUILIBRIUM
LIGHTHEADEDNESS
Patient complaint
“My head is spinning.”
“The room is whirling.”
“I feel I might pass out.”
“I feel faint.”
“I feel like blacking out.”
“I feel unsteady.”
“My balance is off.”
“I feel dizzy.”
“I feel disconnected, 
drugged.”
Associated 
 
features
Motion, swaying, spinning, 
nystagmus
Syncope: loss of postural tone, 
brief loss of consciousness
Situational
Poor balance
No vertigo or ataxia
Anxiety, hyperventilation, 
paresthesias, respiratory 
alkalosis, panic attacks
Usual cause
Vestibular disorders
Impaired cerebral perfusion
Sensory and/or central 
neurologic dysfunction
Decreased venous return
Key differential 
diagnoses
Peripheral (labyrinthine- cochlear) 
vs central neurologic disorder
Neurocardiogenic (vagal) vs 
cardiac syncope vs 
 
neuropsychiatric syncope
Sensory deficit vs central 
neurologic disease
Anxiety/depression vs 
hyperventilation vs 
 
medication effects
Adapted from Cohen G. Syncope and dizziness. In: Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. 
Nelson Pediatric Symptom- Based Diagnosis
; 2018: 
Table 6.1
, p. 84.
EVALUATION
The most important goal in the evaluation of the new patient with syn
-
cope is to diagnose life- threatening causes of syncope so that these causes 
can be managed and more severe outcomes avoided. Many patients pre
-
senting	with	sudden	cardiac	arrest	caused	by	conditions	such	as	LQTS	
will have previously experienced an episode of syncope, so the presenta
-
tion with syncope is an opportunity to prevent sudden death.
The most important tool in evaluation of syncope is a careful 
personal
 
and 
family history
. The characteristics of cardiac syncope differ signifi
-
cantly from benign causes of syncope such as neurocardiogenic syncope 
(
Table	84.6
). Several red flags can be identified that should lead the clini
-
cian to suspect that the mechanism is a life- threatening cardiac cause 
rather than simple fainting (
Table	84.7
). The occurrence 
during
 exercise 
suggests an arrhythmia or an outflow tract or coronary artery obstruc
-
tion. Noncardiac (postexercise) syncope is seen in athletes 
after
 a strenu
-
ous workout or competition and has no associated cardiac features. The 
occurrence of syncope resulting in injury also suggests an arrhythmia, as 
it indicates a sudden onset with a lack of adequate prodromal symptoms. 
The occurrence of syncope while recumbent would be quite unusual in a 
patient with neurocardiogenic syncope and therefore suggests a cardiac 
or neurologic cause. Occasionally, a patient with syncope caused by a 
tachyarrhythmia will report the sensation of a racing heart before the 
event, but this is often not present.
A careful family history is essential in evaluation of syncope. Specifi
-
cally, if there are first- degree relatives with inherited syndromes, such 
as	LQTS,	CPVT,	or	HCM,	this	should	lead	to	more	specific	evaluation	
of the patient. If relatives died suddenly at a young age without a clear 
and convincing cause, inherited cardiac arrhythmias or cardiomyopa
-
thies should also be suspected. Other questions that may increase sus
-
picion for an inherited arrhythmia include family history of congenital 
deafness, unexplained recurrent syncope, poorly controlled seizures, 
single- vehicle car accidents, or drowning events.
Patients with a history of heart disease requiring surgical repair 
may have causes of syncope that are specific to their repair. Sinus node 
dysfunction is common after the Senning or Mustard procedure for 
transposition of the great vessels or after the Fontan procedure for 
single-	ventricle	palliation.	VT	may	be	seen	after	repair	of	tetralogy	of	
Fallot. A patient with a history of repair of a ventricular septal defect or 
an AV canal defect should be evaluated for the late occurrence of AV 
block. Patients with an implanted pacemaker should be evaluated for 
pacemaker lead failure.
The	
physical examination
 may also offer clues (see 
Table	84.7
) 
that point toward cardiac syncope. Patients with HCM or aortic 
stenosis may have a prominent cardiac impulse and/or an ejec
-
tion murmur. A patient with primary pulmonary hypertension 
will have a displaced apical impulse, with a loud and single second 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 84
 u 
Syncope 
595
Table 84.5 
 
  Primary Electrical Abnormalities: Features, ECG, and Treatment
PRIMARY ELECTRICAL 
ABNORMALITIES
FEATURES
ECG
TREATMENT
LQTS: Romano- Ward, 
Jervell–Lange- Nielsen, 
acquired
	•		Familial	genetic	or	acquired	
 
disorders
	•		Ion	channel	pathologic	gene	
 
variant (~17 genes)*
	•		Presents	in	torsades	de	pointes
	•		Romano-	Ward	is	most	common	
inherited
	•		LQTS	Jervell–Lange-	Nielsen	has	
congenital deafness
	•		Prolonged	QT	measured	from	the	
onset of the Q wave to the end of 
the T wave in lead II
	•		Varies	with	HR	but	>0.44	in	men,	
>0.46	in	children	and	women	for	HR	
50- 90 beats/min is prolonged
	•		Torsades	de	pointes	can	occur
	•		Can	deteriorate	from	polymorphic	
ventricular tachycardia to ventricular 
fibrillation
	•	
 β
- Blocker therapy
	•		Recommendations	on	
 
exercise intensity by a 
 
cardiologist
	•		ICD	if	
β
 blockers fail
Brugada syndrome
	•		Inherited	autosomal	dominant	
arrhythmogenic syndrome 
characterized by life- threatening 
ventricular arrhythmias
	•		Pathologic	gene	variant	in	
SCN5A
 
and 13 other genes
	•		ECG	abnormalities	are	from	
repolarization and depolarization 
abnormalities
	•		Coved-	type	ST-	segment	elevations	
in the right precordial leads
	•		J	wave	amplitude	
≥
2 mm followed 
by a negative T wave
	•		Placement	of	ICD
Wolff- Parkinson- White
	•		Owing	to	one	or	more	reentrant	
pathways inducing SVT or atrial 
fibrillation
	•		Up	to	14%	associated	with	
 
malignant tachycardias
	•		Malignant	arrhythmias	from	short	
reentrant pathway repolarization 
or multiple pathways
	•		Short	PR	interval
	•		Delta	waves	present
	•		Undergo	EPS	and	ablation
Dilated cardiomyopathy: 
ventricular tachycardia/
fibrillation
	•		Cardiac	dilation	and	systolic	
 
dysfunction
	•		Inherited	or	acquired
	•		Lamin	AC	pathologic	gene	variant	
a common cause of DCM and SCD
	•		Marked	LVH
	•		Poor	R-	wave	progression
	•		Left	atrial	enlargement
	•		Right	axis	deviation
	•		Permanent	pacemaker	and	
ICD placement
Catecholamine- exercise: 
ventricular tachycardia
	•		Ventricular	ectopy	induced	by	
exercise or emotional stress
	•		Variant	in	gene	that	encodes	
 
Ca- mediated sarcoplasmic fibers
	•		Lethal	in	30–50%	if	left	untreated
	•		Preexercise	ECG	is	usually	normal,	
stress testing recommended
	•		ECG	with	exercise
	•		Nonsustained	wide	ventricular	
tachycardia
	•		
β
- Blocker therapy
	•		Recommendations	on	exercise	
intensity by a cardiologist
	•		ICD	if	
β
 blockers fail
DCM, Dilated cardiomyopathy; EPS, electrophysiology study; HR, heart rate; ICD, implantable cardioverter defibrillator; LQTS, long QT syndrome; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; 
SCD, sudden cardiac death; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia.
*Major genes: 
KCNQ1, KCNH2, SCN5A
 in ~75% cases.
Modified from Ellison S. Sudden cardiac death in adolescents. 
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
. 2015;42:57- 76.
Table 84.6 
 
  Differentiating Features for Causes of Syncope
NEUROCARDIOGENIC
Symptoms after prolonged motionless standing, sudden unexpected pain, fear, or unpleasant sight, sound, or smell; pallor
Syncope in a well- trained athlete 
after
 exertion (without heart disease)
Situational syncope during or immediately after micturition, cough, swallowing, or defecation
Syncope with throat or facial pain (glossopharyngeal or trigeminal neuralgia)
ORGANIC HEART DISEASE (PRIMARY ARRHYTHMIA, OBSTRUCTIVE HYPERTROPHIC CARDIOMYOPATHY, PULMONARY HYPERTENSION)
Brief sudden loss of consciousness, no prodrome, history of heart disease
Syncope while sitting or supine
Syncope with exertion
History of palpitations
Family history of sudden death
NEUROLOGIC
Seizures:	preceding	aura,	postevent	symptoms	lasting	>5	min	(includes	postictal	state	of	decreased	level	of	consciousness,	confusion,	headache,	
or paralysis)
Migraine: syncope associated with antecedent headaches with or without aura
OTHER VASCULAR
Carotid sinus: syncope with head rotation or pressure on the carotid sinus (as in tumors, shaving, tight collars)
Orthostatic hypotension: syncope immediately on standing, especially after prolonged bed rest
DRUG INDUCED
Patient is taking a medication that may lead to long QT syndrome, orthostasis, or bradycardia
PSYCHIATRIC ILLNESS
Frequent syncope, somatic complaints, no heart disease
From Cohen G. Syncope and dizziness. In: Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. 
Nelson Pediatric Symptom- Based Diagnosis
. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: 
Table 6.4
.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

596 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 84.7 
 
  Red Flags in Evaluation of Patients with 
 
Syncope
Syncope with activity or exercise or supine
Syncope not associated with prolonged standing
Syncope precipitated by loud noise or extreme emotion
Absence of presyncope or lightheadedness
Family history of syncope, drowning, sudden death, familial 
 
ventricular arrhythmia syndromes,
*
 cardiomyopathy
Syncope requiring CPR
Injury with syncope
Anemia
Other cardiac symptoms
Chest pain
Dyspnea
Palpitations
History of cardiac surgery
History of Kawasaki disease
Implanted pacemaker
Abnormal physical examination
Murmur
Gallop rhythm
Loud and single second heart sound
Systolic click
Increased apical impulse (tachycardia)
Irregular rhythm
Hypotension or hypertension
Digital clubbing
Cyanosis
*Long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, catecholamine polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy.
heart sound, with an ejection click or murmur of pulmonary insuf
-
ficiency. Patients with repaired congenital heart disease will have 
obvious scars on their chest and abdomen from prior cardiac sur
-
gery or device implantation.
All patients presenting with syncope 
should
 have an 
electrocardio
-
gram
,	looking	primarily	for	QT	interval	prolongation,	preexcitation,	
ventricular	hypertrophy,	T-	wave	abnormalities,	and	conduction	abnor
-
malities. Additional tests that may be needed include echocardiogra
-
phy, exercise testing, cardiac MRI, or 24- hour Holter monitoring. In 
patients for whom there is a strong suspicion of a paroxysmal arrhyth
-
mia, an insertable cardiac monitor (loop recorder) may offer the most 
effective means of diagnosis. Additional tests may be useful to look for 
anemia, hypoglycemia, drugs of abuse, and other etiologies noted in 
Table	84.1
 as determined by the history and physical examination.
 
TREATMENT
Therapy for vasovagal syncope includes avoiding triggering events 
(if possible), fluid and salt supplementation, and if needed, specific 
therapies targeting the orthostatic hypotension (i.e., midodrine) (
Table	
84.8
). Immediately after the event, the patient should remain supine 
until symptoms abate to avoid recurrence.
Treatment for cardiac causes of syncope will be determined by 
the diagnosis
.	If	supraventricular	tachycardia	(SVT)	is	found,	then	a	
catheter ablation may be indicated. If bradycardia from sinus node dys
-
function or AV block is the cause of the syncope, a pacemaker may be 
warranted. Patients with syncope from medically refractory malignant 
arrhythmias,	as	may	be	seen	in	HCM,	LQTS,	arrhythmogenic	cardio
-
myopathy,	or	CPVT,	require	an	implantable	cardioverter-	defibrillator.	
Patients with structural heart disease (valvular disease or coronary 
artery anomalies) should be referred for surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Table 84.8 
 
  Treatment of Neurocardiogenic 
 
Syncope/Vasovagal Syncope (V- VS)
Patient education on the diagnosis and prognosis of V- VS is 
 
recommended.
In all patents with the common faint or V- VS, an explanation of 
the diagnosis, education targeting awareness of and possible 
avoidance of triggers (prolonged standing, warm environments, 
coping with dental and medical settings), and reassurance about 
the benign nature of the condition should be provided.
Physical counterpressure maneuvers can be useful in patients with 
V- VS who have a sufflciently long prodromal period.
Patients with a syncope prodrome should be instructed to assume 
a supine position to prevent a faint and minimize possible 
injury. In patients with a sufficiently long prodrome, physical 
counter- maneuvers (leg crossing, limb and/or abdominal 
contraction, squatting, isometric handgrip, arm tensing) are a core 
management strategy.
Midodrine is reasonable in patients with recurrent V- VS with no 
 
history of hypertension, heart failure, or urinary retention.
Midodrine is a prodrug that is metabolized to desglymidodrine, 
which is a peripherally active 
α
- agonist used to ameliorate the 
reduction in peripheral sympathetic neural outflow responsible for 
venous pooling and vasodepression in V- VS.
The usefulness of orthostatic training is uncertain in patients with 
frequent V- VS.
There are 2 main methods of orthostatic training. Patients undergo 
repetitive tilt- table tests in a monitored setting until a negative 
 
tilt- table test occurs and then are encouraged to stand quietly 
against a wall for 30- 60 min daily, or patients simply stand quietly 
against a wall at home for a prolonged period daily.
Fludrocortisone might be reasonable for patients with recurrent 
V- VS and inadequate response to salt and fiuid intake, unless 
contraindicated.
Fludrocortisone has mineralocorticoid activity resulting in sodium and 
water retention and potassium excretion, which results in increased 
blood volume. Serum potassium level should be monitored because 
of potential drug- induced hypokalemia. POST II (Prevention of 
Syncope Trial II) reported a marginally insignificant 31% risk of 
reduction in adults with moderately frequent V- VS, which was 
significant in patients after a 2- wk dose stabilization period.
Encouraging increases in salt and fiuid intake may be reasonable in 
selected patients with V- VS, unless contraindicated.
Evidence for the effectiveness of salt and fluid intake for patients 
with V- VS is limited. Nonetheless, in patients with recurrent V- VS 
and no clear contraindication, such as a history of hypertension, 
renal disease, heart failure, or cardiac dysfunction, it may be 
reasonable to encourage ingestion of 2- 3 L of fluid per day and a 
total of 6- 9 g (100- 150 mmol) of salt per day, or about 1- 2 heaping 
teaspoonfuls. The long- term balance of risks and benefits of a 
strategy of increasing salt and water intake is unknown.
In selected patients with V- VS, it may be reasonable to reduce or 
withdraw medications that cause hypotension when appropriate.
A careful examination of the patient’s history for medications that 
may lower blood pressure (hypotensive agents) should be performed. 
Care should be taken to withdraw or reduce medications only 
when safe to do so and in conjunction with the prescribing 
 
healthcare provider.
In patients with recurrent V- VS, a selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor might be considered.
Serotonin has central neurophysiologic effects on blood pressure 
and heart rate and acutely induces syncope during tilt- table 
 
testing.
Modified from Shen WK, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline 
for the evaluation and management of patients with syncope: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society [published correction appears in 
Circulation
. 
2017 Oct 17;136(16):e271- e272]. 
Circulation
. 2017;136(5):e60- e122.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 84
 u 
Syncope 
597
84.1
 Postural Tachycardia Syndrome
Gisela G. Chelimsky and Thomas Chelimsky
Several complex and interrelated mechanisms allow humans to 
stand despite the pull of gravity on the cerebral circulation. In the 
supine posture, most blood sits in the thoracic cavity, with 25–30% 
of total volume in the splanchnic vasculature. When an adult stands 
up, about 500 mL of blood shifts to the lower extremities and to the 
splanchnic vasculature. The decrease in hydrostatic pressure in the 
carotid sinuses produces vasoconstriction in the peripheral vessels 
mediated by sympathetic outflow and in the splanchnic vasculature. 
This action is mediated by norepinephrine, adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP),	and	neuropeptide	Y.	The	muscles	in	the	legs	and	gluteal	area	
work as a pump when the individual is upright and during exercise to 
help return the blood to the heart.
Understanding postural tachycardia syndrome, or postural 
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome 
(POTS)
, requires an understand
-
ing of other orthostatic conditions. Many adolescents have light
-
headedness or tunnel vision in the first few seconds of assuming 
the	upright	posture.	This	phenomenon,	termed	
initial orthostatic 
hypotension (IOH)
, can lead to 
syncope,
 but usually is very short, 
perhaps 30- 60 seconds, and occurs primarily with active standing. 
Blood pressure (BP) may drop 30% of baseline at 10- 20 seconds 
of standing and may be associated with tachycardia. BP returns to 
baseline in 30- 60 seconds, whereas heart rate (HR) typically returns 
to a new, higher value above the baseline when supine. Because 
of its transient rapidity, IOH escapes detection with standard BP 
machines	and	requires	beat-	to-	beat	monitoring	of	BP	and	HR.	The	
clinical	diagnosis	requires	a	careful	history.	The	symptoms	usu
-
ally happen after prolonged recumbence and when the individual 
stands.	The	person	complains	of	lightheadedness	and	“blacking	
out” or tunnel vision 5- 10 seconds after standing.
In contrast to IOH, 
orthostatic hypotension (OH)
 is defined as a 
sustained
 decrease in the systolic BP of >20 mm Hg or diastolic BP 
>10 mm Hg in the first 3 minutes of upright tilt. OH rarely occurs 
in	children.	The	patient	often	has	no	orthostatic	symptoms	while	
upright despite very low pressures (
Fig. 84.1
).	This	distinguishes	
OH	from	POTS,	which	
requires
 symptoms while upright. A third 
orthostatic disorder, 
reflex syncope
 (i.e., vasovagal or neurally 
mediated), is defined as relatively sudden change in autonomic 
nervous system activity that leads to a sudden decrease in BP, HR, 
and cerebral perfusion (
Fig. 84.2
).
In	children,	POTS	is	defined	as	a	syndrome	characterized	by	HR	
increase of >40 beats/min during the first 10 minutes of upright tilt 
test without associated hypotension, (>30 beats/min if >19 years old) 
while replicating orthostatic symptoms that occur when upright (
Fig. 
84.3
). Improvement of symptoms in the supine position is expected. 
The	diagnosis	of	POTS	also	requires	
daily
 orthostatic symptoms. In 
patients	with	POTS,	the	larger	decline	in	cardiac	stroke	volume	appears	
to be the primary trigger for the tachycardia, which may result from 
various pathophysiologic mechanisms, such as the following:
Tilt angle (deg)
0.55.010.0
Supine70 degree upright tiltSupine
15.020.025.030.035.040.0
906030H110025Heart rate (bpm)0.55.010.015.020.025.030.035.040.0
160100
8060
140120Blood pressure (mm Hg)
0.55.010.015.020.025.030.035.040.0
175100
7545
150125
Fig. 84.1
 Example of orthostatic hypotension.
Tilt angle (deg)
0.52.04.06.08.010.012.014.016.018.020.022.024.026.029.0
2.04.06.08.010.012.014.016.018.020.022.024.026.029.02.04.06.08.010.012.014.016.018.020.022.024.026.029.0906030H110025Heart rate (bpm)0.5
100
8060
120Blood pressure (mm Hg)
0.5
130
8060
40
100
Supine70 degree upright tiltSupine
Fig. 84.2
 Example of neurally mediated syncope.
Tilt angle (deg)
0.55.010.015.020.025.030.035.040.045.050.055.060.0
906030H110025Heart rate (bpm)0.5
145100
8050
120Blood pressure (mm Hg)
0.5
140
8060
40
120100
Supine5.010.015.020.025.030.035.040.045.050.055.060.05.010.015.020.025.030.035.040.045.050.055.060.070 degree upright tiltSupine
Fig. 84.3
 Example of postural tachycardia syndrome.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

598 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Tilt angle (deg)
0.55.010.015.020.025.030.035.037.0
5.010.015.020.025.030.035.0
37.0
5.010.015.020.025.030.035.0
37.0
906030H110025Heart rate (bpm)0.5
145100
8060
120Blood pressure (mm Hg)
0.5
150
806045
120100
Supine70 degree upright tiltSupine
Fig. 84.4
 Example of postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) followed 
by a neurally mediated syncope.
	•		
Neuropathic
	POTS,	an	autonomic	neuropathy	impairing	sympa
-
thetic venoconstriction in the lower extremities or splanchnic cir
-
culation, decreasing stroke volume and consequently resulting in 
tachycardia.
	•		
Hypovolemic
	POTS,	a	common	contributor,	often	related	to	de
-
creased aldosterone with reduced renin activity, resulting in tachy
-
cardia caused by decreased blood volume.
	•		
Hyperadrenergic
	POTS,	with	norepinephrine	levels	rising	threefold	
to fourfold in the standing position (norepinephrine normally dou
-
bles on standing), which may occur in norepinephrine transporter 
deficiency or strong stimulation of central baroreflex responses.
	•		
Autoimmune
	POTS,	typically	assumed	based	on	a	postviral	chronol
-
ogy, but seldom proven; such a form may or may not exist. The anti
-
ganglionic antibody is almost never elevated in these patients. None
-
theless, a group of patients report that intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIG) is helpful to them. Whether they benefit from the increase in 
intravascular volume or an actual immune effect is unknown.
Some patients have orthostatic symptoms while upright but do not 
meet	criteria	for	syncope,	OH,	or	POTS.	This	group	has	
orthostatic 
intolerance not otherwise specified (OI- NOS)
.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
The	symptoms	that	intrinsically	relate	to	POTS	are	those	that	are	rep
-
licated during upright tilt testing or standing. Many other symptoms 
also	occur	in	patients	with	POTS,	fitting	the	description	of	comorbid	
conditions, but not reproduced while upright. A patient may have nau
-
sea while upright associated with lightheadedness and have a diagnosis 
of	POTS.	Another	patient	may	complain	of	nausea	on	awakening	and	
have	POTS,	but	have	no	nausea	while	upright.	In	the	former	patient	
the	nausea	is	a	symptom	of	POTS	itself,	whereas	in	the	latter	nausea	
is an associated condition. The symptoms that often directly relate to 
POTS	include	lightheadedness,	orthostatic	nausea,	orthostatic	head
-
aches, fatigue, tunnel vision, and brain fog. About 20–30% of pediatric 
patients	with	POTS	will	also	have	syncope	(
Fig. 84.4
). Other comor
-
bid conditions frequently occur in these patients but are not caused 
by	POTS	(i.e.,	not	an	orthostatic	phenomenon).	These	comorbidities	
include (1) sleep issues, usually delayed onset of sleep, frequent awak
-
ening, and not feeling refreshed in the morning; (2) joint hypermobil
-
ity and aches in different parts of the body; (3) abdominal pain; (4) 
headaches and migraines; (5) nausea and vomiting; (6) depression and 
anxiety; and (7) Raynaud- like symptoms and other, less frequent prob
-
lems (e.g., urinary symptoms).
The association between upper gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms 
and	POTS	is	well	described.	Nausea,	early	satiety,	and	bloating	are	
described	in	association	with	POTS.	Such	GI	symptoms	relate	mech
-
anistically	to	POTS	only	when	they	occur	in	the	upright	position.	
Many	patients	with	POTS	have	comorbid	GI	symptoms	that	are	not	
a consequence of the orthostatic challenge. Therefore only the GI 
symptoms replicated during tilt testing will improve with treatment 
aimed	at	orthostasis.	Patients	with	POTS	have	changes	in	the	elec
-
trical activity of the stomach while upright, which may explain the 
upright GI symptoms; they usually do not have delayed gastric emp
-
tying. The emptying is either normal or accelerated, implying that the 
cause of nausea is not gastroparesis.
Patients with 
hypermobility Ehlers- Danlos syndrome
 (h- EDS) 
may	have	POTS.	Typically,	such	individuals	have	more	migraines	and	
syncope. Joint hypermobility itself in 
adults
 is associated with more 
autonomic complaints such as syncope, presyncope, palpitations, 
chest discomfort, fatigue, and heat intolerance. Those with hyper
-
mobility have more frequent positive tilt tests than healthy controls. 
Interestingly, in children, joint hypermobility does not influence the 
number of comorbidities or autonomic disorders. Similarly, those 
with pediatric chronic overlapping pain conditions with or without 
POTS	have	the	same	comorbidities,	suggesting	that	neither	POTS	
nor hypermobility are drivers of the comorbidities or the chronic 
overlapping pain condition, but rather another associated disorder 
(see 
Chapter 212
).
 
DIAGNOSIS
Orthostatic intolerance
 is clinically diagnosed by detailed history 
attending specifically to symptoms as they relate to body position. 
Dizziness that begins in the supine position cannot be a manifesta
-
tion of orthostatic intolerance. Furthermore, those symptoms that 
do develop while upright should improve or resolve when supine. 
Importantly, the history should include a detailed description of 
current physical exercise habits, with frequency, type, and endur
-
ance. One should also assess sleep, diet (mainly evaluating intake of 
salt),	fluid	intake,	and	other	comorbidities.	The	physical	examina
-
tion is also important and should include a cardiac and neurologic 
evaluation with supine and standing BP and HR. Examination of the 
extremities may provide information about venous pooling, such as 
mild edema or reddish- purple discoloration when sitting or stand
-
ing. Cold, clammy hands can signify excess sympathetic activity.
To	diagnose	POTS	the	patient	needs	to	undergo	a	
head- up tilt test 
for at least 10 minutes
. It is important to have the patient supine for 
at	least	20	minutes	before	the	tilt	test.	POTS	can	also	be	assessed	
by a standing test, measuring BP and HR at 1, 3, 5, and 10 minutes 
standing, but to have a reliable test similar to the tilt test, the patient 
needs	to	be	supine	for	1	hour	before	standing.	The	HR	increase	with	
active standing is typically less than with tilt, because the lower- 
extremity	muscle	pump	is	less	active	in	tilt.	The	diagnosis	of	POTS	
requires replication of the day- to- day symptoms while upright, not 
just the increased HR while upright. A small but significant pro
-
portion of healthy teenagers in school will have an increased HR 
 
that	may	be	diagnosed	as	POTS	but	will	not	have	associated	
symptoms.
Other tests may include electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, 
and Holter monitor when there is concern of a primary cardiac 
cause of tachycardia or if there is a need to determine if symptoms 
correlate with tachycardia (see 
Chapter 84
). Supine and standing 
plasma	catecholamines	help	confirm	the	diagnosis	of	POTS,	as	one	
expects to see either the normal doubling of norepinephrine levels 
from	supine	to	standing	or	a	tripling	with	hyperadrenergic	POTS.	
Beyond tilt table testing, autonomic testing will also include car
-
diac response to deep breathing (checking cardiac parasympathetic 
function), Valsalva maneuver (checking cardiac sympathetic and 
parasympathetic functions and vasomotor sympathetic function), 
and quantitative axon reflex sudomotor test (to assess for an auto
-
nomic neuropathy and vasomotor sympathetic dysfunction).
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 84
 u 
Syncope 
599
Additional studies depend on the clinical symptoms and include 
morning cortisol (to rule out Addison disease) and thyroid stud
-
ies if the patient has unusually severe fatigue or is not responsive 
to usual treatment. Serum tryptase and urine methylhistamine are 
tested if mast cell activation disorder is suspected, based on a his
-
tory of flushing during the spells. If an autoimmune cause for the 
POTS	is	a	concern,	antibodies	such	as	voltage-	gated	potassium	
channel and acetylcholine receptor antibodies could be checked, 
but	this	etiology	for	POTS	is	being	questioned.	Patients	rarely	(<5	in	
1,000)	benefit	from	IVIG;	if	this	mechanism	is	really	causing	POTS,	
such patients should experience peak benefit at about 10 days after 
the infusion rather than immediately (which may simply reflect 
increasing intravascular volume). If the patient has hypertension, 
plasma and urine metanephrines should be measured to test for a 
pheochromocytoma. In addition, if symptoms are associated with 
perimenstrual timing, an assessment of sex hormone axis is helpful, 
with occult polycystic ovarian syndrome or low testosterone levels 
sometimes present.
 
MANAGEMENT
The	core	of	POTS	management	is	
nonpharmacologic
. Medications 
will be of little benefit without these measures being undertaken first. 
The	best	measure	for	treating	POTS	is	a	regular	
aerobic exercise
 pro
-
gram. Given the combination of orthostatic symptoms and severe 
deconditioning found in most patients, the exercise program must be 
introduced	in	a	slow,	progressive	manner.	Patients	with	POTS	typically	
have moderate to severe exercise intolerance, and compared with sed
-
entary healthy controls, have decreased peak oxygen uptake. After 3 
months	of	exercise,	POTS	patients	have	an	increase	in	cardiac	mass	
and size, blood volume, and peak oxygen uptake, as reflected in a better 
exercise	performance.	The	tachycardia	in	POTS	is	caused	by	a	decrease	
in stroke volume and not an intrinsic circulatory problem. An exercise 
program should start with water exercises combined with recumbent 
aerobic activities (recumbent bike or rowing machine), slowly increas
-
ing the exercise time to 45 minutes at least 5 times per week. When 
tolerance increases, patients can advance to more upright aerobic 
activities. These aerobic activities need to be combined with light core-  
and limb- strengthening exercises.
Exercise usually cannot be performed without simultaneous 
expansion	of	the	intravascular	volume.	To	this	end,	encourage	
teenagers to drink >80 oz of fluids daily and to add 2 g of salt to 
their usual diet in both the morning and the early afternoon. 
Salt 
supplementation
 increases plasma and blood volume, improves 
orthostatic tolerance, and decreases baroreflex sensitivity. Salt also 
reduces	nitric	oxide	production,	resulting	in	less	vasodilation.	Trial	
and error of different salt formulations can help to identify the best 
method for each individual patient. Salt tablets are simple and inex
-
pensive but may make some people nauseous. An alternative is sim
-
ply to obtain empty capsules on the internet and fill them with table 
salt. A “0” size capsule contains about 400 mg of salt.
The	content	of	sodium	in	the	body	determines	the	extracellu
-
lar fluid volume that in turn dictates orthostatic tolerance. Patients 
with	POTS	who	have	lower	urinary	sodium	excretion	have	more	
symptoms than those with higher urinary sodium (>123 mmol/24 
hours), and they often respond less well to salt supplementation. 
Those	with	severe	orthostatic	symptoms	either	in	the	morning	or	
before sports should drink 16 oz of plain water, which is known to 
increase sympathetic response mainly in individuals with barore
-
flex	dysregulation.	The	effect	starts	soon	after	drinking	the	water	
and lasts for about 1 hour. Compression garments may also be use
-
ful.	These	can	be	thigh	or	waist	high;	the	waist-	high	compression	
garments may not be tolerated.
Medications
 can be added when the nonpharmacologic inter
-
ventions are not sufficient. Different centers use different strategies, 
and there is no single correct evidence- based approach. 
Table	84.9
 
addresses first- line medications that primary care physicians could use; 
only the most common side effects are included.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Table 84.9 
 
  First- Line Medications in Treatment of Postural Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS)
DRUG
MECHANISM OF ACTION
SIDE EFFECTS
TREATMENT GUIDELINES
Fludrocortisone
Low dose: sensitizes 
α
- receptors
Higher doses: mineralocorticoid effect
Peripheral edema, headache, irritability, 
hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, acne
Monitor basic metabolic panel 
and magnesium
Midodrine
α
1
- Agonist; produces vasoconstriction
Scalp tingling, urinary retention, 
goosebumps, headache, supine 
hypertension
Monitor supine blood pressure 
30- 60 min after dose
Metoprolol succinate/
tartrate
β
 Blocker
Worsening of asthma, dizziness, fatigue
Use with caution in asthma
If fatigue is severe, use at bedtime
Propranolol
Nonselective 
β
 blocker
Bradycardia, gastrointestinal symptoms, 
lightheadedness, sleepiness, 
hypotension, syncope
Use with caution in diabetes and 
asthma
Pyridostigmine
Peripheral acetylcholinesterase 
 
inhibitor that increases synaptic 
 
acetylcholine in autonomic ganglia 
and at peripheral muscarinic 
 
receptors
Symptoms of excessive cholinergic activity 
(diarrhea, urinary incontinence, salivation)
Very useful if patient has POTS 
and constipation
Use with caution in asthma
Contraindicated in urinary or 
bowel obstruction
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

600 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Shock
 is an acute, life- threatening process of cardiovascular insuffi
-
ciency characterized by inadequate delivery of oxygen and nutrients 
(e.g., glucose) by the circulatory system to meet the metabolic demands 
of vital organs that results in cellular dysfunction and injury. The initial 
imbalance between oxygen/nutrient delivery through the circulation 
and oxygen/nutrient consumption within organ systems can be com
-
pensated for by increasing tissue oxygen extraction. However, with fur
-
ther limitations in delivery of oxygen and nutrients as the shock state 
progresses, energy production gradually shifts from aerobic metabo
-
lism to less efficient anaerobic metabolic pathways, and a cellular bio
-
energetic crisis can ensue. If this process is not corrected, numerous 
adverse vascular, inflammatory, metabolic, cellular, and endocrine 
responses contribute to a state of 
multiple organ dysfunction syn
-
drome (MODS)
, cardiovascular collapse, and death.
It is important to recognize that the shock state can be present 
before
 
the onset of hypotension, especially in children, and that inadequate 
cellular metabolism of oxygen and nutrients (not just impaired deliv
-
ery) contributes to the clinical manifestations and outcomes observed 
in patients with shock. Therefore it is necessary to recognize early symp
-
toms and signs of impaired circulation, including tachycardia, altered 
mental status (e.g., irritability, confusion, lethargy), tachypnea (often 
secondary to acidemia), abnormal capillary refill time, diminished 
peripheral pulses, and oliguria, in combination with metabolic mark
-
ers such as acidemia, hyperlactatemia, and low central venous oxygen 
saturation. Hypotension, when present, is also important to recognize, 
but	children—especially	infants	and	preschool-	age	children—with	
compensated
 shock may be able to maintain a normal blood pressure 
(BP) for age until the later phases of shock. When hypotension is pres
-
ent, the child has reached a state of 
uncompensated shock
 and is at risk 
of irreversible organ damage and death without immediate treatment.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Shock occurs in approximately 2% of all hospitalized infants, children, 
and adults in developed countries, and the mortality rate varies sub
-
stantially depending on the etiology and clinical circumstances. Of 
patients who do not survive, many do not die in the initial acute phase 
of shock, but rather because of associated complications and MODS. 
MODS is defined as dysfunction in two or more organ systems; the 
presence of MODS in patients with shock substantially increases the 
probability of death. In 2017, there were an estimated 20.3 million cases 
of sepsis, with 2.9 million deaths, worldwide among children younger 
than 5 years and 4.9 million cases of sepsis, with 454,000 deaths, among 
older children and adolescents. In the United States, over 70,000 chil
-
dren are hospitalized with sepsis each year at an annual healthcare cost 
of $7.31 billion. In pediatrics, educational efforts and the use of stan
-
dardized management guidelines that emphasize early recognition and 
intervention, along with the rapid transfer of critically ill patients to 
a pediatric intensive care unit (PICU), have decreased mortality from 
shock.
 
TYPES OF SHOCK
Shock classification systems generally define five major types of shock: 
hypovolemic, cardiogenic, obstructive, distributive, and dissociative 
(
Table	85.1
 and 
Fig. 85.1
). 
Hypovolemic shock
, the most common cause 
of shock in children worldwide, is most frequently caused by acute fluid 
losses resulting from diarrhea, vomiting, or hemorrhage. A special cause 
of hypovolemic shock is hemorrhagic shock, which may be caused by 
traumatic injury or gastrointestinal (GI), peritoneal, vaginal, soft tissue, or 
other sources of severe bleeding. 
Cardiogenic shock
 is seen in patients 
with congenital heart disease (before or after surgery, including heart 
transplantation) or those with congenital or acquired cardiomyopathies, 
including acute myocarditis and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in 
children (MIS- C). 
Obstructive shock
 stems from any lesion that creates 
a mechanical impediment to ventricular blood outflow, which includes 
pericardial tamponade, tension pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, 
and ductal- dependent left- sided heart lesions (hypertrophic left heart syn
-
drome, aortic coarctation, interrupted aortic arch, and critical aortic valve 
stenosis). 
Distributive shock
 is caused by inappropriate vasodilation, 
pooling of blood in the peripheral vasculature, leakage of blood plasma 
into the interstitium through a compromised endothelial barrier, and 
microvascular shunting. Common causes of distributive shock in children 
include sepsis, anaphylaxis, and accidental or intentional drug overdose 
(e.g., calcium channel blockers, atypical antipsychotics). Neurogenic shock 
is a type of distributive shock caused by a sudden disruption of sympa
-
thetic nerve stimulation to the vascular smooth muscle leading to a pro
-
found decrease in vasomotor tone, typically with severe traumatic brain 
or cervical spine injury. Unlike other types of shock, the unopposed vagal 
activity classically results in bradycardia, or at least absence of the usual 
tachycardic response to hypotension. 
Dissociative shock
 is a special cat
-
egory of shock in which cellular oxygen delivery or utilization is severely 
impaired despite sustained or supranormal tissue perfusion and is typically 
caused by exposure to a toxic metabolite or drug, such as severe anemia, 
methemoglobinemia, carbon monoxide poisoning, or thiamine deficiency 
(beriberi).
Septic shock
 is life-threatening cardiovascular dysfunction in patients 
with suspected or confirmed infection and confers a high risk for mor
-
tality in children compared to those with uncomplicated infections or 
sepsis without shock. Sepsis in children is operationalized as a Phoenix 
 
Sepsis Score of at least 2 points from a composite four-organ system model 
that includes criteria for respiratory, neurologic, coagulation, and cardio
-
vascular dysfunction, with septic shock requiring at least 1 point in the 
cardiovascular subscore (
Table	85.2
). Many children with septic shock also 
 
have MODS, including respiratory, kidney, hematologic (disseminated 
intravascular coagulation [DIC]), hepatobiliary, and neurologic dysfunc
-
tion. Septic shock classically presents as a type of distributive shock with 
high cardiac output and low systemic vascular resistance (SVR). However, 
most children with sepsis also have features of hypovolemic shock from 
poor oral intake, GI fluid losses, and vascular leak as well as cardiogenic 
shock due to decreased myocardial contractility. In younger children, 
 
septic shock often presents with low cardiac output and high SVR in which 
features of cardiogenic and hypovolemic shock predominate.
 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
An initial insult triggers shock, leading to a decrease in effective cardiac 
output with inadequate oxygen delivery to organs and tissues. Compen
-
satory mechanisms attempt to maintain BP by increasing cardiac output 
and SVR. The body also attempts to optimize oxygen delivery to the tis
-
sues by increasing oxygen extraction and redistributing blood flow to the 
brain, heart, and kidneys at the expense of the skin, skeletal muscles, and 
GI tract. These responses lead to an initial state of 
compensated shock
 in 
which BP is often maintained near normal levels for age. If resuscitative 
treatment is not initiated or is inadequate during this period, 
uncom
-
pensated shock
 develops, with hypotension and tissue damage that may 
lead to irreversible organ damage, MODS, and, ultimately, death.
In the early phases of shock, multiple compensatory physiologic 
mechanisms act to maintain BP and preserve tissue perfusion and 
oxygen delivery. Cardiovascular effects include increases in heart rate 
(HR), stroke volume, and vascular smooth muscle tone, which are reg
-
ulated through sympathetic nervous system activation and neurohor
-
monal responses. Respiratory compensation involves greater carbon 
dioxide (CO
2
) elimination in response to the metabolic acidosis and 
increased CO
2
 production from poor tissue perfusion. Renal excre
-
tion of hydrogen ions (H
+
) and retention of bicarbonate (HCO
3
−
) also 
increase in an effort to maintain normal body pH (see 
Chapter 73.7
). 
Maintenance of intravascular volume is facilitated via renal sodium 
retention mediated by activation of the renin- angiotensin- aldosterone 
and atrial natriuretic factor axes, cortisol and catecholamine synthesis 
Chapter 
85
Shock
Scott L. Weiss, Pierre Tissières, and 
 
Mark J. Peters
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85
 u 
Shock 
601
and release, and antidiuretic hormone secretion. Despite these com
-
pensatory mechanisms, the underlying shock and host response lead 
to vascular endothelial cell injury and loss of endothelial adhesion pro
-
teins that allow significant leakage of intravascular fluid into the inter
-
stitial extracellular space.
Another important aspect of the initial pathophysiology of shock is 
the impact on cardiac output. All forms of shock affect cardiac output 
through several mechanisms, with changes in HR, preload, afterload, 
and myocardial contractility occurring separately or in combination 
(see 
Fig. 85.1
). 
Hypovolemic shock
 is characterized primarily by fluid 
loss	and	decreased	preload.	Tachycardia	and	an	increase	in	SVR	are	the	
initial compensatory responses that seek to maintain cardiac output, 
systemic BP, and tissue perfusion. Without adequate volume replace
-
ment, hypotension inevitably develops, followed by tissue ischemia and 
further clinical deterioration. When there is preexisting low plasma 
oncotic pressure (caused by nephrotic syndrome, malnutrition, hepatic 
dysfunction, acute severe burns, etc.), further volume loss and exacer
-
bation of shock may result from worsening vascular leak.
In contrast, the underlying pathophysiologic mechanism leading to 
distributive shock
 is a state of abnormal vasodilation and decreased 
SVR. In sepsis, loss of normal regulation of vasomotor tone is due to 
a combination of factors, including excessive nitric oxide (NO) pro
-
duced from an increase in inducible NO synthase, altered sympathetic 
and parasympathetic tone, and diminished circulating levels and/or 
reduced responsiveness to vasopressin, endogenous catecholamines, 
and cortisol. In anaphylaxis, vasodilation is caused by an acute release 
of histamine and other mediators from mast cells. Irrespective of the 
inciting event, the sudden fall in SVR is accompanied initially by a mal
-
distribution of blood flow away from vital organs and a compensatory 
increase in cardiac output caused by an increase in HR and, poten
-
tially, left ventricular stroke volume. This process leads to significant 
decreases in both preload and afterload. Therapies for distributive 
shock must address both these problems simultaneously.
Cardiogenic shock
 may be seen in patients with myocarditis, car
-
diomyopathy, arrhythmias, and congenital heart disease (generally 
after cardiac surgery) (see 
Chapter 483
). In these patients, myocardial 
contractility is directly impaired, leading to systolic and/or diastolic 
dysfunction. The later phases of all forms of shock frequently have a 
negative impact on the myocardium, leading to development of a car
-
diogenic component to the initial shock state.
able 85.1 
 
 Types of Shock
TYPES OF 
SHOCK
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
APPEARANCE
EXAMPLES
TREATMENTS
Hypovolemic
*
Decreased cardiac output 
due to volume depletion 
→
 decreased preload
Tachycardia and vasoconstriction 
maintain adequate circulation 
up to 30% of circulating volume
Narrowed pulse pressure, delayed 
capillary refill, orthostatic 
changes, late hypotension, 
AMS, and decreased UOP
Nonhemorrhagic (vomiting 
and diarrhea)
Hemorrhagic (trauma)
IV fluid bolus
Vasopressors
Blood replacement
Cardiogenic
Decreased cardiac output 
due to myocardial 
dysfunction, increased 
afterload, and/or lack of 
ventricular filling
Tachycardia, vasoconstriction, 
cool extremities, narrow pulse 
pressure, delayed capillary refill, 
respiratory distress, rales or 
gallop rhythm, enlarged liver, 
JVD, cardiomegaly on chest 
radiograph
Significant gradient between 
 
upper and lower extremity 
blood pressures
Cardiomyopathies, infectious 
myocarditis, and systemic 
inflammatory process, 
autoimmune disease, 
impaired coronary 
perfusion, cardiopulmonary 
bypass, acidosis, HIE, and 
dysrhythmias
Infants: ductal- dependent 
 
lesions, tachydysrhythmias
Judicious IV fluid resuscitation, 
ionotropic agents to 
improve contractility, 
vasodilators to reduce 
afterload, and management 
of tachyarrhythmias
PGE	for	infants	<2	mo
Distributive
Decreased cardiac output 
and systemic vascular 
 
resistance due to peripheral 
vasodilation 
→
 decreased 
afterload and preload, 
redistribution of blood flow 
away from vital organs, and 
loss of sympathetic outflow
Tachycardic, vasodilated, flushed, 
warm extremities, wide pulse 
pressure, bounding pulses, flash 
capillary refill
Anaphylaxis: rash; facial swelling; 
lip, tongue, or airway swelling; 
bronchospasm; hypotension
Spinal shock: unable to raise HR, 
hypotension
Neurogenic: Control 
↑
 ICP
Septic shock
Toxic ingestions
Anaphylaxis
IV fluids, vasopressors, 
 
antibiotics
Specific antidotes
Remove triggers, IV fluids, IM 
epinephrine, antihistamines, 
vasopressors
Spinal cord injuries
IV fluids, vasoconstrictors
Obstructive
Decreased cardiac output 
due to increased afterload 
of the right ventricle from 
an obstructive process
Tachycardia, delayed capillary 
refill, cool extremities, narrow 
pulse pressure, distended neck 
veins, distant heart tones, 
 
asymmetric breath sounds
Tension pneumothorax
Pulmonary embolism
Cardiac tamponade
Anticoagulants
Drain pericardial effusion
Evacuate pneumothorax
Dissociative
High cardiac output failure 
due to inadequate 
oxygen- releasing capacity
Tachycardia ± delayed capillary 
refill, cool extremities, 
weakened pulse, pallor or 
flushed cheeks
Anemia
Carbon monoxide
Methemoglobinemia
Cyanide
Gradual fluid replacement and 
blood replacement 5 mL/dL
Oxygen, hyperbaric chamber
Methylene blue
Hydroxocobalamin and 
cyanide antidote kit (sodium 
thiosulfate, sodium nitrate, 
amyl nitrite) plus oxygen
*Most common.
AMS, Altered mental status; HIE, hypoxic ischemic encephalopathies; HR, heart rate; IM, intramuscular; ICP, intracranial pressure; IV, intravenous; JVD, jugular venous distention; PGE, 
prostaglandin; UOP, urine output.
Modified from Baumer- Mouradian SH, Drendel AL. Shock. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. 
Nelson Pediatric Symptom- Based Diagnosis,
 2nd ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier;2023: 
Table 10.4
.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

602 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
ShockTypeEtiologyHypovolemicMajor traumaGastrointestinal bleedDehydrationCardiogenicObstructiveDistributiveMyocardial infarctionMyocarditisArrhythmiaPulmonary embolus
Cardiac tamponadeTension pneumothoraxStatus asthmaticusSepsisSpinal cord injuryAnaphylaxisIngestionNeurogenic
DissociativeAnemia, carbonmonoxide or cyanidepoisoning,methemoglobinemia*Cardiovascular findingsPreload (filling pressures)Cardiac contractilityCardiac outputAfterload (peripheral tone)Hemodynamic supportRelieve obstructionVolume expansionInotropesVasopressors
Fig. 85.1
 The causes, cardiovascular findings, and hemodynamic support for different types of shock. Under cardiovascular findings, 
bidirectional arrows
 indicate variation in findings among 
patients with the particular type. Under hemodynamic support, the number of 
+ signs
 indicates the importance of therapy. A combined 
+ and −
 indicates that the intervention could help some 
patients but must be used with caution. *Treat specific etiology transfusion or specific antidotes. 
(Modified from Angus DC. Approach to the patient with shock. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. 
Goldman- Cecil Medicine, 
26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:642, 
Fig. 98- 1
.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85
 u 
Shock 
603
Obstructive shock
 manifests as an acute increase in SVR typi
-
cally in response to a sudden decrease in cardiac output that resem
-
bles a state of functional hypovolemia. A compensatory increase in 
HR and afterload provides temporary support, but compensation 
will soon fail without relief of the mechanical obstruction.
Dissociative shock
 is caused by the inability to deliver oxygen due 
to severe anemia or a congenital or acquired hemoglobinopathy, such 
as carbon monoxide intoxication. Alternatively, oxygen delivery may 
be preserved, but consumption can be impaired by a metabolic dis
-
order or acquired state of mitochondrial dysfunction, such as cyanide 
able 85.2 
   The Phoenix Sepsis Score
a
VARIABLES
0 POINTS
1 POINT
2 POINTS
3 POINTS
RESPIRATORY, 0–3 POINTS
Pa
O
2
:FI
O
2
 
≥
400 or 
Sp
O
2
:FI
O
2
 
≥
292
b
Pa
O
2
:FI
O
2
	<400	on	any	
respiratory support or 
Sp
O
2
:FI
O
2
	<292	on	any	
respiratory support
b
,
c
Pa
O
2
:FI
O
2
 100–200 and 
IMV or Sp
O
2
:FI
O
2
 
148–220 and IMV
b
Pa
O
2
:FI
O
2
<100	and	IMV	
or Sp
O
2
:FI
O
2
	<148	and	
IMV
b
CARDIOVASCULAR, 0–6 POINTS
1 point each (up to 3)
2 points each (up to 6)
No vasoactive 
medications
d
1 Vasoactive medication
d
≥
2 Vasoactive medications
d
Lactate	<5	mmol/L
e
Lactate 5–10.9 mmol/L
e
Lactate 
≥
11 mmol/L
e
AGE BASED
f
Mean Arterial Pressure, mm Hg
g
<1	mo
>30
17–30
<17
1 to 11 mo
>38
25–38
<25
1	to	<2	yr
>43
31–43
<31
2	to	<5	yr
>44
32–44
<32
5	to	<12	yr
>48
36–48
<36
12 to 17 yr
>51
38–51
<38
COAGULATION, 0–2 POINTS
H
1 point each (maximum 
 
2 points)
Platelets 
≥
100 × 10
3
/μL
Platelets	<100	×	10
3
/μL
International normalized 
ratio 
≤
1.3
International normalized 
ratio	>1.3
D-dimer 
≤
2 mg/L FEU
D-dimer	>2	mg/L	FEU
Fibrinogen 
≥
100 mg/dL
Fibrinogen	<100	mg/dL
NEUROLOGIC, 0–2 POINTS
i
Glasgow Coma Scale score 
>10;	pupils	reactive
j
Glasgow Coma Scale score 
≤
10
j
Fixed pupils bilaterally
PHOENIX SEPSIS CRITERIA
Sepsis
Suspected infection and 
Phoenix Sepsis Score 
≥
2 
points
Septic shock
Sepsis with 
≥
1 
cardiovascular point(s)
a
The score may be calculated in the absence of some variables (eg, even if lactate level is not measured and vasoactive medications are not used, a cardiovascular score can 
still be ascertained using blood pressure). It is expected that laboratory tests and other measurements will be obtained at the discretion of the medical team based on clinical 
judgment. Unmeasured variables contribute no points to the score. Ages are not adjusted for prematurity, and the criteria do not apply to birth hospitalizations, neonates whose 
postconceptional age is younger than 37 weeks, or those 18 years of age or older.
b
Sp
O
2
:FI
O
2
 ratio is only calculated if Sp
O
2
 is 97% or less.
c
The respiratory dysfunction of 1 point can be assessed in any patient receiving oxygen, high-flow, noninvasive positive pressure, or IMV respiratory support, and includes a Pa
O
2
:FI
O
2
 
ratio of less than 200 and a Sp
O
2
:FI
O
2
 ratio of less than 220 in children who are not receiving IMV. For children receiving IMV with a Pa
O
2
:FI
O
2
 less than 200 and Sp
O
2
:FI
O
2
 less than 
220, see criteria for 2 and 3 points.
d
Vasoactive medications include any dose of epinephrine, norepinephrine, dopamine, dobutamine, milrinone, and/or vasopressin (for shock).
e
Lactate reference range is 0.5 to 2.2 mmol/L. Lactate can be arterial or venous.
f
Age is not adjusted for prematurity, and the criteria do not apply to birth hospitalizations, children whose postconceptional age is younger than 37 weeks, or those 18 years or older.
g
Use measured MAP preferentially (invasive arterial if available or noninvasive oscillometric), and if measured MAP is not available, a calculated MAP (1/3 × systolic + 2/3 × diastolic) 
may be used as an alternative.
h
Coagulation	variable	reference	ranges:	platelets,	150	to	450	×	103/μL;	D-dimer,	<0.5mg/L	FEU;	fibrinogen,	180	to	410mg/dL.	The	INR	reference	range	is	based	on	the	local	reference	
prothrombin time.
i
The neurological dysfunction subscore was pragmatically validated in both sedated and nonsedated patients, and those receiving or not receiving IMV support.
j
The Glasgow Coma Scale score measures level of consciousness based on verbal, eye, and motor response (range, 3–15, with a higher score indicating better neurological function).
FEU, fibrinogen equivalent units; IMV, invasive mechanical ventilation; INR, international normalized ratio of prothrombin time; MAP, mean arterial pressure; Pa
O
2
:FI
O
2
, arterial partial 
pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio; Sp
O
2
, oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry (only Sp
O
2
 of 
≤
97%).
SI conversion factor: To convert lactate from mmol/L tomg/dL, divide by 0.111.
From Schlapbach LJ, Watson RS, Sorce LR, et al. International Consensus Criteria for Pediatric Sepsis and Septic Shock. 
JAMA
. Published online January 21, 2024. 
https://doi.org/10.
1001/jama.2024.0179
.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

604 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
toxicity. Notably, varying degrees of dissociative shock may also be 
present in other shock types, especially sepsis, in which acquired pyru
-
vate dehydrogenase deficiency or mitochondrial dysfunction have 
been increasingly recognized.
Septic shock
 is generally a unique combination of distributive, hypovo
-
lemic, and cardiogenic shock, as well as dissociative shock. Hypovolemia 
from insufficient fluid intake, GI losses, and/or vascular leak is common. 
Cardiogenic shock results from the myocardial- depressant effects of sep
-
sis, and distributive shock is the result of decreased SVR. The degree to 
which a patient exhibits each of these responses varies, but there are fre
-
quently alterations in preload, afterload, and myocardial contractility.
In septic shock, it is important to distinguish between the inciting 
infection and the host inflammatory response. Normally, host immu
-
nity prevents the development of sepsis through activation of the retic
-
ular endothelial system along with the cellular and humoral immune 
systems. This host immune response produces an 
inflammatory cas
-
cade
 mediated by hormones, cytokines, and chemokines. If this inflam
-
matory cascade is uncontrolled, derangement of the microcirculatory 
system leads to subsequent organ and cellular dysfunction.
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)
 is an inflamma
-
tory cascade that is initiated by the host response to an infectious or nonin
-
fectious trigger (
Table	85.
3
). This inflammatory cascade is triggered when 
the host defense system does not adequately recognize and/or eliminate 
the triggering event. The inflammatory cascade initiated by shock can lead 
to hypovolemia, cardiac and vascular failure, acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS), insulin resistance, decreased cytochrome P450 activity 
(decreased steroid synthesis), coagulopathy, and unresolved or secondary 
infection.	Tumor	necrosis	factor	(TNF)	and	other	inflammatory	mediators	
increase vascular permeability, causing diffuse vascular leak, decreased 
vascular tone, and an imbalance between perfusion and metabolic 
demands	of	the	tissues.	Early	increases	in	TNF,	interleukin	(IL)-	1,	and	
IL- 6 stimulate the release of both proinflammatory and antiinflammatory 
mediators, causing fever, vasodilation, and myocardial dysfunction. Simul
-
taneous upregulation of antiinflammatory mediators (such as circulating 
levels of IL- 4, IL- 10, and transforming growth factor- 
β
), downregulation 
of hematopoietic growth factors (such as IL- 7), and increased expression 
of immune cell surface checkpoint proteins (such as programmed death 
[PD]- 1 and its PD ligand [PD- L1/2]), as well as production of immature 
immune cells through emergency myelopoiesis contribute to a state of 
immune dysregulation that can impair pathogen clearance and allow for 
secondary infections.
The inflammatory cascade is initiated by toxins or superantigens 
through macrophage binding or lymphocyte activation. The vascular 
endothelium is both a target of tissue injury and a source of media
-
tors that may cause further injury. Biochemical responses include the 
production of arachidonic acid metabolites, release of myocardial- 
depressant factors and endogenous opiates, activation of the comple
-
ment system, and production and release of other mediators, which 
Table 85.3 
 
  Differential Diagnosis of Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS)
INFECTION
Bacteremia or meningitis (
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus 
influenzae
 type b, 
Neisseria meningitidis
, group A 
Streptococcus
, 
Staphylococcus aureus
)
Viral illness (influenza, enteroviruses, hemorrhagic fever group, 
herpes simplex virus, respiratory syncytial virus, cytomegalovirus, 
Epstein- Barr virus, COVID- 19)
Encephalitis (arboviruses, enteroviruses, herpes simplex virus)
Rickettsiae (Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Ehrlichia, Q fever)
Syphilis
Vaccine reaction (pertussis, influenza, measles)
Toxin- mediated reaction (toxic shock, staphylococcal scalded skin 
syndrome)
CARDIOPULMONARY
Pneumonia (bacteria, virus, mycobacteria, fungi, allergic reaction)
Pulmonary emboli
Heart failure
Arrhythmia
Pericarditis
Myocarditis
METABOLIC- ENDOCRINE
Adrenal insufficiency (adrenogenital syndrome, Addison disease, 
corticosteroid withdrawal)
Electrolyte disturbances (hyponatremia or hypernatremia, 
hypocalcemia or hypercalcemia)
Diabetes insipidus
Diabetes mellitus
Inborn errors of metabolism (organic acidosis, urea cycle, carnitine 
deficiency, mitochondrial disorders)
Hypoglycemia
GASTROINTESTINAL
Gastroenteritis with dehydration
Volvulus
Intussusception
Appendicitis
Peritonitis (spontaneous, associated with perforation or peritoneal 
dialysis)
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Hepatitis
Hemorrhage
Pancreatitis
HEMATOLOGIC/IMMUNE
Anemia (sickle cell disease, blood loss, nutritional)
Methemoglobinemia
Splenic sequestration crisis
Leukemia or lymphoma
Hemophagocytic syndromes
Cytokine release syndrome s/p CAR- T therapy
Immune reconstitution syndrome
Graft- versus- host disease
NEUROLOGIC
Intoxication (drugs, carbon monoxide, intentional or unintentional 
overdose)
Intracranial hemorrhage
Infant botulism
Trauma (child abuse, accidental)
Guillain- Barre syndrome
Myasthenia gravis
OTHER
Anaphylaxis (food, drug, insect sting, idiopathic)
Hemolytic- uremic syndrome
Kawasaki disease
Erythema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis
MIS- C
Poisoning, iron, cyanide
Toxic envenomation
Systemic JIA
Macrophage activation syndrome
Idiopathic systemic capillary leak (Clarkson) syndrome
CAR- T, Chimeric antigen receptor T- cell; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; MIS- C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children; S/P, status post.
From Baumer- Mouradian SH, Drendel AL. Shock. In: Kliegman RM, Bordini BJ, Toth H, Basel D, eds. 
Nelson Pediatric Symptom- Based Diagnosis
, 2nd ed. Elsevier: Philadelphia; 2022: 
Table 10.6
.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85
 u 
Shock 
605
may be proinflammatory or antiinflammatory. The balance among 
these mediator groups for an individual patient contributes to the pro
-
gression (and resolution) of disease and affects the prognosis.
 
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Table	85.1
 and 
Figure 85.1
 show a classification system for shock. Cat
-
egorization is important, but there may be significant overlap among 
these groups, especially in septic shock. The clinical presentation of 
shock depends in part on the underlying etiology, but if unrecognized 
and untreated, all forms of shock follow a common progression of 
clinical signs and pathophysiologic changes that may ultimately lead 
to irreversible organ injury and death. Among the first physiologic 
responses is sympathetic adrenergic system activation and its related 
signs and symptoms.
Shock may initially manifest as only tachycardia, with or without 
tachypnea.
 Progression leads to decreased urine output, poor periph
-
eral perfusion, respiratory distress or failure, alteration of mental sta
-
tus, and low BP (
Table	85.
4
). A significant misconception is that shock 
occurs only with low BP. Hypotension is often a late finding, especially 
in infants and young children, and is not a criterion for the diagnosis 
of shock because of a complex set of compensatory mechanisms that 
attempt to preserve BP and peripheral perfusion. Hypotension reflects 
an advanced state of uncompensated shock and is associated with 
increased morbidity and mortality.
Hypovolemic shock
 often manifests initially as tachycardia and 
orthostatic hypotension and is associated with dry mucous membranes, 
dry axillae, poor skin turgor, and decreased urine output. Depending 
on the degree of dehydration, the patient with hypovolemic shock 
may present with either normal or slightly cool distal extremities, and 
peripheral pulses may be normal, decreased, or absent depending on 
disease severity.
The presenting signs of 
cardiogenic shock
 are often tachypnea, cool 
extremities, delayed capillary filling time, poor peripheral and/or central 
pulses, reduced pulse pressure, declining mental status, and decreased 
urine output caused by the combination of decreased cardiac output and 
compensatory peripheral vasoconstriction (see 
Chapter 491.1
).
Obstructive shock
 often also manifests as inadequate cardiac 
output because of a physical restriction of forward blood flow with 
tachycardia, delayed capillary refill, cool extremities, diminished 
peripheral pulses, and decreased pulse pressure (difference between 
systolic and diastolic BP) or presence of pulsus paradoxus. The acute 
presentation may quickly progress to cardiac arrest. Obstructive 
shock due to tension pneumothorax typically includes signs of respi
-
ratory distress, hypoxia, and diminished breath sounds. Pericardial 
tamponade includes Beck’s triad of hypotension, jugular vein disten
-
tion, and muffled heart sounds. A saddle pulmonary embolism often 
presents with a sudden cardiac arrest. Left- heart obstructive lesions 
may present in newborns with discrepant perfusion of the upper and 
lower extremities.
Distributive shock
 includes signs of vasodilation, including tachy
-
cardia, flash capillary refill, warm extremities, bounding peripheral 
pulses, and increased pulse pressure, often with diastolic hypotension. 
In neurogenic shock, tachycardia may be absent or frank bradycardia 
may be present. Similar to distributive shock, signs of vasodilation may 
be present, although in the immediate phase, the patient can feel cool 
peripherally with delayed capillary refill.
Septic shock
 can be difficult to diagnose because of the wide spec
-
trum of presenting signs and symptoms. A key historical clue is the 
presence of fever (or hypothermia) along with evidence for either a 
systemic
 (e.g., bacteremia, rickettsial disease, fungemia, viremia) or 
localized
 (e.g., meningitis, pneumonia, pyelonephritis, peritonitis, nec
-
rotizing fasciitis) infection. Infants and young children most commonly 
present with “cold shock,” with features of hypovolemic and cardio
-
genic shock predominating, including tachycardia, delayed capillary 
refill, cool extremities, diminished peripheral pulses, and decreased 
pulse pressure. Older children and adolescents, especially those with 
sepsis from indwelling central venous catheters, more commonly pres
-
ent with “warm shock” that resembles distributive shock, including 
tachycardia, flash capillary refill, warm extremities, bounding periph
-
eral pulses, and increased pulse pressure. However, the pathobiology of 
sepsis can evolve over time and with treatment in children, such that 
“warm shock” may shift to “cold shock” or vice versa.
In addition to the traditional description of septic shock, a subgroup 
immunophenotype presents with 
hyperferritinemia
. Ferritin levels >3,000 
mg/mL often predict a poor prognosis and the need for intensive care unit 
(ICU) admission. Hyperferritinemic septic shock may be due to familial 
primary genetic hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) (usually age 
<2 years; see 
Chapter 556.2
) or, more often, secondary HLH initiated by an 
infectious agent or macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) (see 
Chapter 
207
) associated with autoimmune diseases (
Table	85.6
).
Regardless of etiology, uncompensated shock, with hypotension, high 
SVR, decreased cardiac output, respiratory failure, obtundation, and oli
-
guria, occurs late in the progression of disease. 
Table	85.1
 lists the hemo
-
dynamic findings in various shock states. Additional clinical findings 
in shock include cutaneous lesions such as petechiae, diffuse erythema, 
ecchymoses, ecthyma gangrenosum, and peripheral gangrene. Jaundice 
can be present either as a sign of infection or as a result of MODS.
 
DIAGNOSIS
Shock is a clinical diagnosis that should be primarily based on a thor
-
ough history and physical examination (see 
Tables	85.1,	85.4,	and	
85.
6
). Important clues to consider in the history are recent trauma or 
bleeding, exposure to new medications or substances, preceding or 
concurrent symptoms of infection or fluid losses, the patient’s comor
-
bid conditions, and a brief review of systems. The physical examination 
should include rapid assessment of vital signs (including pulse oxim
-
etry), mental status/level of consciousness, extremity temperature, 
peripheral and central pulses, capillary refill, and presence of rashes 
or skin changes.
Increasingly, point- of- care ultrasound (POCUS) is being incorporated 
into the initial assessment of children with shock to assess intravascular 
volume status, likelihood of a positive hemodynamic response to fluid 
able 85.4 
 
 Signs of Decreased Perfusion
ORGAN SYSTEM
↓
 PERFUSION
↓
↓
 PERFUSION
↓↓↓
 PERFUSION
Central nervous system
—
Restless, apathetic, anxious
Agitated/confused, stuporous, coma
Respiratory
—
↑
 Ventilation
↑
↑
 Ventilation
Metabolic
—
Compensated metabolic acidemia
Uncompensated metabolic acidemia
Gastrointestinal
—
↓
 Motility
Ileus
Kidney
↓
 Urine volume
Oliguria	(<0.5	mL/kg/hr)
Oliguria/anuria
↑
 Urinary specific gravity
Skin
Delayed capillary refill
Cool extremities
Mottled, cyanotic, cold extremities
Cardiovascular system
↑
 Heart rate
↑
↑
 Heart rate
↑
↑
 Heart rate
↓
 Peripheral pulses
↓
 Blood pressure, central pulses only
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

606 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
therapy, and myocardial function. Cardiac and lung POCUS may also pro
-
vide important diagnostic information about the etiology of shock, such 
as the presence of pericardial fluid to support tamponade, pneumotho
-
rax, or dilated right ventricle to support pulmonary embolus. The focused 
assessment	with	sonography	for	trauma	(FAST)	is	commonly	performed	
to screen for pericardial effusion and hemoperitoneum.
 
LABORATORY FINDINGS
Although the initial diagnosis of shock can and should be based on 
clinical data from the history and physical examination, the overall 
evaluation of shock should also include early laboratory testing to 
screen for hyperlactatemia (as a sign of increased anaerobic metabo
-
lism), acidemia, and electrolyte disturbances, including hypoglycemia 
and hypocalcemia. In children with septic shock, elevations in both 
venous and arterial blood lactate levels in the emergency department 
(ED) are associated with risk of organ dysfunction when measured in 
the ED and are associated with higher risk of death if elevated at the 
time of PICU admission. Although the optimal cutoff remains to be 
defined, arterial lactate 
≥
2 mmol/L is worrisome and associated with 
worse outcome. Laboratory evidence of concurrent MODS should 
also be sought, including a complete blood count, renal function tests, 
liver function tests, and coagulation profile (including fibrinogen and 
d
- dimer or fibrin split products). Elevated neutrophil counts with 
increased immature forms (i.e., bands, myelocytes, promyelocytes) 
and elevated CRP and procalcitonin levels may be seen with infection. 
A blood gas analysis may be helpful to assess the degree of respiratory 
dysfunction, and an elevated venous to arterial P
co
2
 gap 
≥
5 mm Hg 
(
≥
0.67 KPa) may signify an early shock state. For septic shock, at least 
one blood culture should be collected along with other cultures as sup
-
ported by the history and physical. Ferritin levels should be determined 
in all patients with septic shock. In the presence of hyperferritinemia, 
laboratory studies for HLH and MAS should be obtained, including 
fibrinogen, triglycerides, CBC, soluble IL- 2 receptor, natural killer 
(NK) cells, and specific genetic testing.
The hallmark of 
uncompensated
 shock is an imbalance between oxygen 
delivery (D
o
2
) and oxygen consumption (V
o
2
). Oxygen delivery normally 
exceeds oxygen consumption by threefold. The oxygen extraction ratio is 
approximately 25%, thus producing a normal central venous oxygen satu
-
ration (Sv
o
2
) of approximately 75%, most commonly measured from a 
catheter at the junction of the superior vena cava and right atrium. Sv
o
2
 
values <70% reflect an increased oxygen extraction ratio and document a 
decrease in oxygen delivery relative to consumption. This increase in tissue 
oxygen extraction is an attempt to maintain adequate oxygen delivery at 
the cellular level. This state is manifested clinically by increased lactic acid 
production (e.g., high anion gap, metabolic acidemia) caused by anaero
-
bic metabolism and a compensatory increase in tissue oxygen extraction. 
Notably, in dissociative shock, hyperlactatemia is often accompanied by 
an elevated Sv
o
2
 >80–85%, which reflects a state of impaired oxygen use 
despite adequate tissue perfusion. 
Elevated blood lactate levels reflect poor 
tissue oxygen delivery noted in all forms of shock.
 
TREATMENT
Almost all healthcare professionals that care for ill children will be 
faced with managing the clinical syndrome of shock, given that many 
childhood illnesses, such as gastroenteritis, infection, trauma, and toxic 
ingestions, can precipitate shock. Without timely medical intervention, 
the child in shock will inevitably follow a common pathway to MODS 
and death. Early recognition and resuscitation are therefore critical to 
limit morbidity and mortality associated with shock.
General Principles of Shock Management
Initial management begins with early recognition of the compensated or 
uncompensated shock state based on the history, physical examination, 
and laboratory assessments outlined earlier. Once recognized, immedi
-
ate efforts to restore oxygen (and other nutrient) delivery by supporting 
the circulation and identifying and reversing the underlying etiology of 
shock are necessary (
Fig. 85.2
). Restoration of oxygen delivery includes 
ensuring airway patency and adequacy of breathing, providing supple
-
mental oxygen if hypoxemia (Sp
o
2
 <92–94%) is present, establishing 
vascular access, expanding the circulating blood volume, supporting the 
cardiac and vascular system with appropriate vasoactive agents when 
necessary, and frequently reassessing the patient’s response to initial 
therapy. The management strategies discussed in the following sections 
apply to all shock types, with additional discussion at the end of the sec
-
tion for type- specific management recommendations.
Vascular access
 should be established within the first few minutes 
of shock recognition, ideally with at least two large- bore peripheral 
intravenous (IV) catheters. If peripheral IV access is not successful 
within 5 minutes, intraosseous (IO) access should be established until 
more definitive access is secured. Central venous access should be con
-
sidered for patients with unstable peripheral IV access, persistence of 
shock despite 40- 60 mL/kg fluid bolus therapy 
(fluid- refractory shock),
 
or need for vasoactive medications or concentrated dextrose/electro
-
lyte administration. In addition to optimizing safe administration of 
certain medications, central venous access will also enable measure
-
ment of Sv
o
2
. Placement of an arterial catheter should be considered 
for patients with fluid- refractory shock who require active titration of 
vasoactive medications and/or those who may need serial laboratory 
tests, including frequent reassessment of blood lactate or electrolyte 
derangements. Notably, placement of a central venous or arterial cath
-
eter requires specialized skills that may not be immediately available, in 
which case continued resuscitation through peripheral IV or IO access, 
including initiation of vasoactive medications, is safe and appropriate.
Volume resuscitation
 with fluid bolus therapy in aliquots of 10- 20 
mL/kg pushed over 5- 10 minutes is currently recommended for most 
types of shock and in most settings in children (see special consider
-
ations in septic shock later and 
Fig. 85.3
). Several observational studies 
have demonstrated improved outcomes in children with shock with 
initial volume resuscitation titrated to improvements in hemodynamic 
targets, including decrease in HR; increase in BP; normalization of 
capillary refill, peripheral pulse strength, and extremity temperature; 
Table 85.5 
 
  Considerations in Management of 
 
Hyperferritinemic Sepsis Beyond Usual 
 
Diagnostic and Therapeutic Measures Used in 
Sepsis Patients Without Hyperferritinemia
WHAT OCCULT INFECTION IS PRIMING AND WHAT 
 
CO- INFECTION IS PRESENT FOR THE HYPERFERRITINEMIC 
 
PROCESS
Perform diagnostic workup for 
viruses
 (e.g., herpes simplex virus 1, 
HHV- 6, HHV- 8, Epstein- Barr virus, adenovirus, cytomegalovirus, 
parvovirus, Ebola, COVID- 19, Dengue, hepatitis A, HIV, severe 
fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus, influenza, 
hemorrhagic fevers), 
parasites
 (e.g., toxoplasmosis, leishmaniasis, 
malaria, scrub typhus, babesiosis), 
intracellular bacteria
 (e.g., 
tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria, mycoplasma, fusobacteria, 
babesiosis, ehrlichiosis), rickettsia, and 
fungi
 (e.g., histoplasmosis).
Begin empiric therapy and specific therapies according to context.
Give IVIG if no specific therapy is available to neutralize infection.
IS HEMOLYSIS AND FREE HEMOGLOBIN DRIVING THE 
 
HYPERFERRITINEMIC PROCESS?
Measure free hemoglobin and ferritin sequentially.
Minimize blood transfusions.
If unable to reverse hemolysis or hyperferritinemia, consider 5 days 
of plasma exchange to remove free hemoglobin and ferritin and to 
resolve inflammation.
IS AN ANTIINFLAMMATORY STRATEGY NEEDED TO SAFELY 
CONTROL INFLAMMASOME ACTIVATION?
If	ferritin	is	>3,000	ng/mL	in	the	high-	resource	PICU	setting,	or	>500	
ng/mL in the resource- poor PICU setting, then mortality risk is 
increased.
Methylprednisone, IVIG, and interleukin 1 receptor antagonist 
(anakinra) can be safely given to reduce mortality risk in these 
children.
HHV, human herpes virus; PICU; pediatric intensive care unit; IVIG, IV immunoglobulin.
Modified from Carcillo JA, Kernan KK, Horvat CM, et al. Why and how is 
hyperferritinemic sepsis different from sepsis without hyperferritinemia? 
Pediatr Crit 
Care Med
. 21(5):509- 512, 
Table 1
, p. 511.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85
 u 
Shock 
607
improved urine output; and fall in blood lactate by 
≥
10–20%. Fluid 
boluses totaling up to 60 mL/kg may be needed in the first hour of 
resuscitation, with volumes exceeding 200 mL/kg over several hours. 
Fluid should be administered via IV push or a rapid infuser system. 
IV push delivery may be facilitated by attaching a large syringe with 
a three- way stopcock to the IV tubing from the fluid bag, creating a 
“push- pull system” that allows the user to rapidly draw up fluid into the 
syringe and then administer to the patient without repeatedly discon
-
necting and reconnecting the syringe to the patient’s IV. In patients >50 
kg, a pressure bag or rapid infuser may be used to rapidly administer 
fluid through a large- gauge peripheral IV. Notably, in neonates, addi
-
tional caution should be paid to fluid resuscitation, as tolerance may 
be limited by reduced myocardial ventricular compliance at baseline.
Importantly, not all children with shock will continue to improve 
with repeated volume resuscitation, particularly those with cardio
-
genic and dissociative shock, severe anemia, or malnutrition. Before 
repeating a fluid bolus, the clinician should determine if the patient 
responded in a hemodynamically desirable way after the prior fluid 
bolus and ensure that signs of fluid overload, such as rales, gallop 
rhythm, or hepatomegaly, have not developed. POCUS may also be 
helpful to identify ongoing hypovolemia and predict response to ongo
-
ing volume resuscitation. For children with evidence of fluid overload, 
adequate intravascular volume, or lack of hemodynamic improvement 
with prior fluid boluses, resuscitation should shift from volume resus
-
citation	to	vasoactive	medications.	Trials	of	earlier	initiation	of	vasoac
-
tive support are ongoing to further clarify the optimal role of volume 
resuscitation in pediatric shock.
The optimal fluid type for initial shock resuscitation remains a matter 
of debate. Most studies have not demonstrated a clear benefit for use of 
colloids, such as 4–5% albumin, over crystalloids, though there may be a 
small clinical benefit for resuscitation with colloids in septic shock. There is 
also evidence supporting a risk of kidney injury and coagulopathy with the 
use of synthetic colloids, such as hydroxyethyl starch and gelatin, and their 
use is currently not recommended. Because crystalloids are inexpensive, 
easy to administer, and readily available, current guidelines generally rec
-
ommend initial resuscitation begin with these fluids. Exceptions include 
children with hemorrhagic shock and dissociative shock resulting from 
severe anemia for whom early blood product transfusion is preferred.
Crystalloid volume resuscitation may include 0.9% normal saline or 
balanced/buffered fluids, such as lactated Ringer solution, Hartmann 
solution, and Plasma- Lyte. Saline consists of only sodium and chloride in 
a 1:1 ratio with a supraphysiologic chloride concentration, whereas bal
-
anced fluids have an anion buffer and electrolyte composition closer to 
human blood plasma, though formulations vary. As a result, high- volume 
resuscitation with 0.9% saline often induces a hyperchloremic metabolic 
acidemia. Although 0.9% remains the most commonly used crystalloid 
able 85.6 
 
 Physical Examination and Selected Laboratory Signs in Shock
Central nervous system
Acute delirium, restlessness, disorientation, confusion, and coma, which may be secondary to decreased cerebral 
perfusion pressure (mean arterial pressure minus intracranial pressure). Patients with chronic hypertension or 
increased intracranial pressure may be symptomatic at normal blood pressures. Cheyne- Stokes respirations may be 
seen with severe decompensated heart failure. Blindness can be a presenting complaint or complication.
Temperature
Hyperthermia results in excess tissue respiration and greater systemic oxygen delivery requirements. Hypothermia 
can occur when decreased systemic oxygen delivery or impaired cellular respiration decreases heat generation.
Skin
Cool distal extremities (combined low serum bicarbonate and high arterial lactate levels) aid in identifying patients 
with hypoperfusion. Pallor, cyanosis, sweating, and decreased capillary refill and pale, dusky, clammy, or mottled 
extremities indicate systemic hypoperfusion. Dry mucous membranes and decreased skin turgor indicate low 
vascular volume. Low toe temperature correlates with the severity of shock.
General cardiovascular
Neck vein distention (e.g., heart failure, pulmonary embolus, pericardial tamponade) or flattening (e.g., hypovolemia), 
tachycardia, and arrhythmias. Decreased coronary perfusion pressures can lead to ischemia, decreased ventricular 
compliance, and increased left ventricular diastolic pressure. A “mill wheel” heart murmur may be heard with an air 
embolus.
Heart rate
Usually elevated. However, paradoxical bradycardia can be seen in patients with preexisting cardiac disease and 
severe hemorrhage. Heart rate variability is associated with poor outcomes.
Systolic blood pressure
May actually increase slightly when cardiac contractility increases in early shock and then fall as shock advances.
Diastolic blood pressure
Correlates with arteriolar vasoconstriction and may rise early in shock and then fall when cardiovascular compensation 
fails.
Pulse pressure
Defined as systolic minus diastolic pressure and related to stroke volume and the rigidity of the aorta. Increases early 
in shock and decreases before systolic pressure decreases.
Pulsus paradoxus
An	exaggerated	change	in	systolic	blood	pressure	with	respiration	(systolic	blood	pressure	declines	>10	mm	Hg	with	
inspiration) seen in asthma, cardiac tamponade, and air embolus.
Mean arterial blood 
pressure
Diastolic blood pressure + [pulse pressure/3]
Shock index
Heart	rate/systolic	blood	pressure.	Normal	=	0.5-	0.7.	A	persistent	elevation	of	the	shock	index	(>1.0)	indicates	
impaired left ventricular function (as a result of blood loss or cardiac depression) and is associated with increased 
mortality.
Respiratory
Tachypnea, increased minute ventilation, increased dead space, bronchospasm, hypocapnia with progression to 
respiratory failure, acute lung injury, and adult respiratory distress syndrome.
Abdomen
Low- flow states may result in abdominal pain, ileus, gastrointestinal bleeding, pancreatitis, acalculous cholecystitis, 
mesenteric ischemia, and shock liver.
Renal
Because the kidney receives 20% of cardiac output, low cardiac output reduces the glomerular filtration rate 
and redistributes renal blood flow from the renal cortex toward the renal medulla, thereby leading to oliguria. 
Paradoxical polyuria in early sepsis may be confused with adequate hydration.
Metabolic
Respiratory alkalosis is the first acid- base abnormality, but metabolic acidosis rapidly occurs as shock progresses. 
Hyperglycemia, hypoglycemia, and hyperkalemia may develop. Hyperferritinemia suggests a poor prognosis.
From Angus DC. Approach to the patient with shock. In Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. 
Goldman- Cecil Medicine,
 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:643, 
Table 98- 1
.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

608 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
for pediatric volume resuscitation, increasing data suggest that balanced/
buffered fluids are associated with less acute kidney injury, inflammation, 
coagulopathy, endotheliopathy, and death. However, pediatric studies 
comparing balanced/buffered fluids with 0.9% saline have reported con
-
flicting results, and adult interventional trials have not shown a consistent 
benefit for either crystalloid fluid type. Consequently, pending further data 
from ongoing studies, either 0.9% saline or balanced/buffered crystalloids 
are appropriate for initial volume resuscitation.
Resuscitation with blood products should be prioritized for children 
with hemorrhagic shock. The 
Advanced Trauma Life Support
 guidelines 
recommend resuscitation with red blood cells, plasma, and platelets in a 
ratio of 1:1:1 to limit coagulopathy and other risks associated with large- 
scale transfusion. For children with other forms of shock, the criteria to 
transfuse red blood cells are not clear, though it is reasonable to target 
hemoglobin levels >9 g/dL for children who remain hemodynamically 
unstable with low Sv
o
2
 and/or high blood lactate despite other interven
-
tions. Notably, transfusion of plasma or platelets should be reserved to treat 
active bleeding or reduce risk of bleeding before an invasive procedure 
rather than used solely to correct laboratory abnormalities or as volume 
expanders.
Vasoactive medications
 should be initiated for children with fluid- 
refractory shock, with early consideration for inotropes, such as epi
-
nephrine, when myocardial dysfunction is present and vasopressors, 
such as norepinephrine, when vasoplegia is present (
Table	85.
7
). For 
children with septic shock, two randomized trials have demonstrated 
that epinephrine as first- line vasoactive therapy is more effective at 
reducing mortality than dopamine. As such, epinephrine is the pre
-
ferred first- line vasoactive therapy for fluid- refractory septic shock. 
Fig. 85.2
 Surviving Sepsis Campaign 2020 Initial Resuscitation Algorithm for Children. For children with clinical signs of shock, the following six 
key management steps should be completed within 1 hour of initial recognition of shock: (1) obtain intravenous/intraosseous access, (2) collect 
blood culture, (3) start empiric broad- spectrum antibiotics, (4) measure blood lactate, (5) administer crystalloid fluid therapy with volume and rate 
reflecting healthcare setting and titrated to patient response, and (6) initiate vasoactive medications if shock persists despite fluid and other therapy. 
VA, venoarterial; VV, venovenous; ECLS, extracorporeal life support. 
(© 2020 the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the European Society of 
Intensive Care Medicine. All Rights Reserved. 
https://www.sccm.org/getattachment/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines/Pediatric- Patients/Initial- 
Resuscitation- Algorithm- for- Children.pdf.aspx?lang=en- US
.)
Respiratory support© 2020 the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. All Rights Reserved.
www.sccm.org/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines/Pediatric-PatientsSystematic Screening for Sepsis in ChildrenInitial ResuscitationAlgorithm for Children
Within 1 hour of initial recognition of septic shockWithin 3 hours of initial suspicion of sepsis
Obtain IV/IO access.Collect blood culture.Start empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics.Measure lactate.Administer fluid bolus(es) if shock is present.*Start vasoactive agents if shock persists.*
1
2
3
4
5
SEPTIC SHOCK!
SEPSIS SUSPECTED!Expedited diagnostic evaluationDiagnostic evaluation supports sepsis-associated organ dysfunction
Shock develops*See fluid and vasoactive algorithm. Note: Fluid bolus should be omitted from bundle if a) fluid overload is present or b) it is a low-resource setting without hypotension. Fluid in mL/kg should be dosed as ideal body weight.**Hydrocortisone may produce benefit or harm.Assess for Pediatric Acute Respiratory Distress SyndromeAdvanced hemodynamic monitoring if shock persistsFluid and vasoactive titration*Infectious source control•+/- hydrocortisone for refractory shock**•Nutritional support•Avoid hypoglycemia•Antimicrobial stewardshipVA or VV ECLS for refractory shock or oxygenation/ventilation failure (after addressing other causes of shock and respiratory failure)Continuous reassessment
6
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85
 u 
Shock 
609
Epinephrine is also a potent inotrope and is the recommended initial 
vasoactive agent in children with cardiogenic shock. However, in chil
-
dren with a low- SVR state, as may be seen with distributive, septic, or 
neurogenic shock, norepinephrine should be preferentially prescribed 
as the first- line vasoactive therapy. Although vasoactive agents are ide
-
ally administered through a central venous line, these medications can 
be safely initiated through a peripheral IV or an IO in dilute concentra
-
tions while central venous access is obtained.
Electrolyte abnormalities
, such as hypoglycemia and hypocal
-
cemia, may precipitate or worsen shock. Blood glucose and ionized 
calcium can both be measured rapidly via bedside point- of- care test
-
ing, and if present, hypoglycemia and hypocalcemia should be cor
-
rected during the initial resuscitation. Other patterns of electrolyte 
abnormalities may indicate the presence of an underlying inborn error 
of metabolism, particularly in a neonate with shock. Any provider 
treating a patient with known or suspected inborn error of metabolism 
should consult immediately with a specialty center while resuscitating 
with volume and dextrose.
Airway management
 is an essential component of the initial man
-
agement of shock. Early intervention to maintain an unobstructed 
© 2020 the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. All Rights Reserved.Fluid and Vasoactive-InotropeManagement Algorithm For Children 
SEPTIC SHOCK !
Healthcare Systems WITH Intensive CareHealthcare Systems WITHOUT Intensive CarePresence of all 3 World Health Organization criteria: cold extremities, prolonged capillary refill > 3 seconds, weak/fast pulseOR*Hypotension in healthcare systems WITHOUT intensive care is defined as either:
SBP < 50 mm Hg in children age < 12 
monthsSBP < 60 mm Hg 
in children age 1 to 5 
yearsSBP < 70 mm Hg in children age > 5 
years
Abnormal perfusion WITHOUT hypotension•Do NOT give fluid bolus unless there are signs of dehydration with ongoing fluid losses 
(eg, diarrhea).•Start maintenance fluids.•Monitor 
hemodynamics 
closely.•Consider vasoactive-
inotropic support (if available).Abnormal perfusion WITH hypotension*•If signs of fluid overload 
are absent, administer fluid bolus, 10-20 mL/kg. •Assess hemodynamic 
response to fluid and repeat fluid boluses, 10-20 mL/kg, until hypotension resolves or signs of fluid overload develop.•Assess cardiac function (if available).•Consider epinephrine/
norepinephrine if hypotension persists after 40 mL/kg or sooner if signs of fluid 
overload develop.Abnormal Perfusion with or without Hypotension•If signs of fluid overload 
are absent, administer fluid bolus, 10-20 mL/kg.•Repeat assessment of 
hemodynamic response to fluid and consider fluid boluses, 10-20 mL/kg, until shock resolves or signs of fluid overload develop.•Assess cardiac function.•Consider epinephrine if there is myocardial dysfunction or epinephrine/
norepinephrine if shock persists after 40-60 mL/
kg (or sooner if signs of 
fluid overload develop).
•Monitor for signs/symptoms of recurrent shock.•Consider 
maintenance fluids.•Do not give more fluid boluses.
Shock resolved, perfusion improvedwww.sccm.org/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines/Pediatric-Patients
Fluid in mL/kg should be dosed as ideal body weight.
Fig. 85.3
 Surviving Sepsis Campaign 2020 Fluid and Vasoactive- Inotrope Management Algorithm for Children. For children with septic shock 
treated in healthcare systems in which intensive care is accessible (either locally or via transport), fluid bolus therapy up to 40- 60 mL/kg is recom
-
mended in the first hour of therapy until shock resolves or signs of fluid overload develop. For children with septic shock treated in healthcare 
systems in which intensive care is not available locally or via transport, fluid bolus therapy is not recommended unless hypotension is present. For 
all children, early assessment of cardiac function is recommended with consideration for initiation of epinephrine (or alternative inotrope) if myocar
-
dial dysfunction is evident. SBP, systolic blood pressure. (
© 2020 the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the European Society of Intensive Care 
Medicine. All Rights Reserved. 
https://www.sccm.org/getattachment/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines/Pediatric- Patients/Initial- Resuscitation- 
Algorithm- for- Children.pdf.aspx?lang=en- US
.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

610 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
airway may be needed in patients who are obtunded or have suf
-
fered a traumatic neck or chest injury. Supplemental oxygen should 
be provided to correct hypoxemia if Sp
o
2
 is <92–94%. Although uni
-
versal supplemental oxygen administration can, in theory, augment 
tissue oxygen delivery by increasing oxygen content of the blood, this 
approach is of little benefit if the oxyhemoglobin saturation is >92–
94%, and some studies suggest harm from hyperoxia. However, uni
-
versal administration of high fraction of inspired oxygen is likely to be 
beneficial for patients with severe anemia or dissociative shock. When 
oxygen is required, use of a 100% non- rebreather mask provides the 
highest amount of noninvasive supplemental oxygen delivery.
Indications for intubation and mechanical ventilation include acute 
hypoxemic or hypercarbic respiratory failure or persistence of circula
-
tory failure, in which case a reduction in metabolic demand facilitated by 
sedation and ventilatory support can be helpful. Sedation and endotra
-
cheal intubation reduce the work of breathing, which can divert cardiac 
output away from the muscles of respiration and improve perfusion to 
other organs. However, extra caution needs to be taken during intubation 
and the transition from negative pressure to positive pressure ventilation. 
Positive pressure ventilation will decrease venous return in a patient who 
is already hypovolemic, which could precipitate cardiovascular collapse. 
It is therefore prudent to have fluid boluses readily available and vasoac
-
tive agents started or immediately ready to administer during this transi
-
tion. Of the sedative agents available for intubation, ketamine is generally 
preferred because of its favorable hemodynamic effects that typically 
augment cardiac output and BP. As several studies have reported adverse 
outcomes after intubation with etomidate, pediatric septic shock guide
-
lines recommend against using etomidate in these patients.
 
Specific Management Considerations by Shock Type
For children with 
cardiogenic shock
 due to congenital heart disease, 
cardiomyopathies, myocarditis, MIS- C, or other causes, decreased 
myocardial contractility must be reversed by early treatment with 
inotropes, such as epinephrine, dopamine, dobutamine, or milrinone. 
Gentle volume resuscitation to optimize preload may also be helpful, 
but excessive fluid administration can worsen volume overload and 
further compromise heart function. Despite adequate cardiac output 
with the support of inotropic agents, a high SVR with poor peripheral 
perfusion and acidosis may persist in cardiogenic shock. Therefore, if 
not already started, inodilators such as milrinone may improve systolic 
function and decrease SVR without causing a significant increase in 
HR. Furthermore, this agent has the added benefit of enhancing dia
-
stolic relaxation. Dobutamine or other vasodilating agents, such as 
nitroprusside, may also be considered in this setting (see 
Table	85.
7
).
In 
obstructive shock
, action is often needed to relieve the point of 
mechanical obstruction. Examples include thoracentesis for tension 
pneumothorax, pericardiocentesis for cardiac tamponade, and admin
-
istration of systemic fibrinolytic medications for pulmonary embolism. 
For neonates or young infants (typically <2- 3 weeks of age) with shock 
caused by ductal- dependent congenital heart disease, a prostaglandin 
infusion should be started to maintain systemic cardiac output while 
preparing to transfer to a pediatric specialty center.
The management of 
septic shock
 should follow the recommenda
-
tions of the 2020 Surviving Sepsis Campaign International Guidelines 
for the Management of Septic Shock and Sepsis- Associated Organ 
Dysfunction in Children (see 
Fig. 85.2
 and 
Fig. 85.3
). These guidelines 
recommend six initial management steps in the first hour after shock 
Table 85.7 
 
 Vasoactive Medications to Treat Shock
DRUG
EFFECT(S)
DOSING
 RANGE
COMMENT(S)
Epinephrine
↑
 Heart rate and 
↑
 cardiac contractility
0.05- 2.0 μg/kg/min
May 
↓
 renal perfusion at high 
doses
Vasodilator at low doses, but potent 
vasoconstrictor	at	doses	>0.1	mcg/kg/min
↑
 Myocardial O
2
 consumption
Risk of arrhythmia at high doses
Norepinephrine
Potent vasoconstriction
0.05- 2.0 μg/kg/min
↑
 Blood pressure secondary to 
↑
 
systemic vascular resistance
↑
 Cardiac contractility (but may be blunted by 
increased afterload)
↑
 Left ventricular afterload
Dopamine
↑
 Cardiac contractility
3- 20 μg/kg/min
↑
 Risk of arrhythmias at high doses
Significant peripheral vasoconstriction at 
>10	μg/kg/min
Dobutamine
↑
 Cardiac contractility
3- 10 μg/kg/min
—
Peripheral vasodilator
Phenylephrine
Potent vasoconstriction
No effect on cardiac contractility
0.25- 2.0 μg/kg/min
Can cause sudden hypertension
Vasopressin
Potent vasoconstriction
0.5-20 milliunits/kg/min
Can cause sudden hypertension
Angiotensin II
Potent vasoconstrictor
Stepwise increase 5- 10- 25- 40-80 
 
ng/kg/min over 3 hr with titration 
down to 1.25-40 ng/kg/min after 
3 hr
Can cause sudden hypertension, 
arterial ischemia
Methylene blue
Reduce responsiveness to cGMP- dependent 
(e.g., ischemia- reperfusion, NO mediated) 
vasodilators
Bolus 1-2 mg/kg, then consider 
continuous infusion 0.5-.01 mg/
kg/hr
Causes blue/green discoloration 
of skin and urine
Milrinone
Increased cardiac contractility
0.25-1.0 μg/kg/min
Phosphodiesterase inhibitor—
 
slows cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate breakdown
Improves cardiac diastolic function
Peripheral vasodilation
Prostaglandin E
1
Vasodilator
0.01- 0.2 μg/kg/min
Can lead to hypotension
Maintains an open ductus arteriosus in the 
newborn with ductal- dependent congenital 
heart disease
Risk of apnea
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 85
 u 
Shock 
611
recognition, including obtaining IV/IO access, collecting a blood cul
-
ture, administering empiric broad- spectrum antibiotics, measuring 
lactate, providing volume resuscitation, and initiating vasoactive medi
-
cation if shock persists despite fluid therapy. Early administration of 
antibiotics targeted to the most likely pathogens for each patient has 
been associated with reduced mortality and more rapid resolution of 
organ dysfunction.
Notably, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign suggests volume resuscita
-
tion with up to 40- 60 mL/kg in bolus fluid (10- 20 mL/kg per bolus) 
over the first hour, titrated to clinical markers of cardiac output and 
discontinued if signs of fluid overload develop, for children with septic 
shock treated in geographic regions that have access to intensive care 
(either locally or via transport) or in any setting when hypotension is 
present. However, in healthcare systems with no availability to access 
intensive care, fluid bolus therapy was associated with increased risk of 
mortality	in	the	FEAST	clinical	trial	when	hypotension	was	not	pres
-
ent, and thus fluid management should focus on starting maintenance 
fluids only in these settings (see 
Fig. 85.3
).
 
Fluid- Refractory and Catecholamine- Resistant Shock
If shock persists despite volume resuscitation and vasoactive support 
with an initial catecholaminergic agent, such as epinephrine, the child 
has 
fluid- refractory and catecholamine- resistant shock
. Such chil
-
dren have an increased risk for MODS and death, especially if require
-
ment for vasoactive support is high, blood lactate exceeds 8 mmol/L 
(or is rising after 6 hours of resuscitation), and/or myocardial dysfunc
-
tion is present. Several additional management considerations must 
be taken into account in this scenario, including evaluation for atypi
-
cal and/or reversible etiologies, second- line vasoactive medications, 
stress- dose corticosteroids, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO).
Atypical and reversible etiologies
 that may contribute to refrac
-
tory shock include hypothyroidism and intraabdominal hypertension/
abdominal compartment syndrome. In addition, one must consider 
the presence of obstructive shock (tamponade, pneumothorax), an 
unrecognized closing ductus arteriosus, uncontrolled hemorrhage 
(which often requires surgical intervention), anaphylaxis, and need 
for removal of an infectious source (e.g., infected catheter, empyema, 
abdominal abscess).
Stress- dose corticosteroids
 are indicated for patients with septic 
shock who have absolute adrenal insufficiency, such as that caused by 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, septic shock with purpura, prior ste
-
roid therapy for chronic illness, or hypopituitarism. Some children with 
septic shock may also develop 
critical illness–related corticosteroid insuf
-
ficiency
 with an inadequate adrenal response to a severe stress. Stress 
doses of hydrocortisone (50- 100 mg per m
2
 per day) 
are recommended 
for those with risk factors for absolute adrenal insufficiency (e.g., septic 
shock with purpura, prior steroid therapy for chronic illness, known 
pituitary or adrenal abnormalities) and can be considered for children 
with fluid- refractory, catecholamine- resistant shock without a revers
-
ible etiology pending further data from ongoing clinical trials.
Second- line vasoactive therapy
 should be considered for patients 
in whom shock persists despite titration of the initial vasoactive agent. 
For patients with “warm” shock or evidence of low SVR initially 
treated with norepinephrine, the addition of vasopressin or epineph
-
rine may be considered. Case reports, case series, and one trial indi
-
cate that administration of vasopressin is associated with an increase 
in mean arterial BP and urine output in children with fluid- refractory, 
catecholamine- resistant septic shock. However, in a multicenter trial 
of 65 children with vasodilatory shock, low- dose vasopressin did not 
decrease the time to hemodynamic stability off of vasoactive agents 
versus placebo (49.7 vs 47.1 hours), and there was a concerning trend 
toward increased mortality in the vasopressin group (30% vs 16%, 
p
 = 
0.24). For patients with “cold” shock or evidence of myocardial dys
-
function, priority should be given to improving cardiac contractility 
with inotropes. First- line therapy with epinephrine is recommended, 
with addition of dopamine, dobutamine, or norepinephrine as second- 
line agents, but these agents should be carefully titrated, as they may 
contribute to arrhythmias and increase myocardial oxygen demand. 
Initiation of inodilators, such as milrinone, can help to augment con
-
tractility, improve lusitropy (diastolic relaxation), and lower SVR but 
are generally longer- acting and should be carefully titrated to avoid 
worsening hypotension. Notably, it may be difficult to accurately dif
-
ferentiate between “warm” (low SVR) from “cold” (high SVR) shock 
using only clinical signs, such as extremity temperature, strength of 
peripheral pulses, and capillary refill time. Frequent reassessment and 
response to therapy are therefore paramount to ensure optimal titra
-
tion of vasoactive therapies.
ECMO is a rescue option for patients suffering refractory septic 
shock, with reported survival rates of 
∼
70% for newborns and 
∼
50% 
for older children. One study suggests that central cannulation via ster
-
notomy may achieve survival rates of 74% for refractory septic shock. 
In cardiogenic shock due to myocarditis treated with ECMO, survival 
rates of 70% have been reported. Although counterintuitive because 
of the need for systemic anticoagulation, ECMO has also been used 
successfully in hemorrhagic shock in a small series. In most cases of 
refractory shock, venoarterial ECMO is preferred over the venovenous 
route due to the presence of hemodynamic instability. A ventricular 
assist device may be considered as an alternative to ECMO in some 
children with cardiogenic shock.
 
Targets for Shock Reversal
Clinical signs of successful resuscitation include a decrease in HR and 
respiratory rate, increase in BP, improved urine output to >0.5 mL/
kg/hr, normalization of mental status, decreased capillary refill time, 
warmth of distal extremities, and improved peripheral pulses. Serial 
laboratory measurements should aim for a rise in Sv
o
2
 to >70% and a 
decreasing trend in blood lactate levels as evidence for increased tissue 
oxygen extraction and adequate oxygen delivery to meet cellular meta
-
bolic demand. In one observational study of septic shock in children, 
normalization of blood lactate to <2 mmol/L within 4 hours was asso
-
ciated with reduced organ dysfunction. Blood pH and base deficit may 
also be used as laboratory surrogates for improved tissue perfusion, 
but these may be affected by the degree of hyperchloremia after fluid 
resuscitation or by changes in ventilation.
Other parameters to monitor for improvement in shock include 
serial POCUS to assess volume status, cardiac output, and tissue 
perfusion; cutaneous near- infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) to measure 
regional tissue perfusion; and other devices that can estimate cardiac 
output based on the relationship among BP, stroke volume, arterial 
compliance, and SVR (e.g., pulse contour waveform analysis). If car
-
diac output is measured, aiming for a cardiac index between 3.3 and 
6.0 L/min/m
2
 is appropriate.
Though children can have isolated cardiovascular dysfunction with 
shock, many have additional associated organ dysfunctions or MODS. 
Ongoing support of noncardiovascular organ dysfunction is often 
required even after improvement or resolution of shock.
 
PROGNOSIS
In septic shock, mortality rates are as low as 3% in previously 
healthy children and 6–9% in children with chronic illness (com
-
pared with 25–30% in adults). With early recognition and therapy, 
the mortality rate for pediatric shock continues to improve, but 
shock and MODS remain one of the leading causes of nonaccidental 
death	in	infants	and	children.	The	risk	of	death	involves	a	complex	
interaction of factors, including the underlying etiology, presence 
of chronic illness, host immune response, and timing of recognition 
and therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

612 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
The term 
respiratory distress
 is used to denote signs and symptoms of 
an abnormal respiratory pattern. A child with nasal flaring, tachypnea, 
chest wall retractions, stridor, grunting, dyspnea, or wheezing has 
respiratory	distress.	Taken	together,	the	magnitude	of	these	findings	is	
used to judge clinical severity. Nasal flaring is nonspecific, but the other 
signs are useful in localizing the site of pathology (see 
Chapter 421
). 
Respiratory failure
 is defined as the inability of the lungs to provide suf
-
ficient oxygen (hypoxic respiratory failure) or remove carbon dioxide 
(ventilatory failure) to meet metabolic demands. Therefore, whereas 
respiratory distress is determined by a clinical impression, respiratory 
failure is diagnosed when inadequate oxygenation or ventilation (or 
both) are present. Respiratory distress can occur in patients without 
respiratory disease, and respiratory failure can occur in patients with
-
out respiratory distress.
RESPIRATORY DISTRESS
A careful physical examination must be performed when evaluating 
a child in respiratory distress. 
Nasal flaring
, although nonspecific, 
is an extremely important sign of distress in infants. It may indicate 
discomfort, pain, fatigue, acidosis, or breathing difficulty. The state of 
responsiveness
 is another crucial sign. Lethargy, disinterest in sur
-
roundings, and weak cry are suggestive of exhaustion, hypercarbia, 
and impending respiratory failure. Abnormalities of the rate and depth 
of 
breathing
 can occur with both pulmonary and nonpulmonary 
causes of respiratory distress. In diseases of decreased lung compli
-
ance, such as pneumonia and pulmonary edema, breathing is charac
-
teristically rapid and shallow (decreased tidal volume). In obstructive 
airway diseases, such as asthma and laryngotracheitis, breathing gen
-
erally is deep with increased tidal volume, but less rapid. Rapid and 
deep breathing (tachypnea and hyperpnea) without other respiratory 
signs should raise suspicion of possible nonpulmonary or nonthoracic 
causes of respiratory distress, such as response to metabolic acidosis 
(e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis, renal tubular acidosis) or stimulation of 
the respiratory center (e.g., encephalitis, ingestion of central nervous 
system stimulants). Suprasternal, intercostal, and subcostal 
retrac
-
tions
 are manifestations of increased inspiratory effort, weak chest 
wall, or both. Inspiratory 
stridor
 indicates airway obstruction above 
the thoracic inlet, whereas expiratory 
wheezing
 results from airway 
obstruction below the thoracic inlet. 
Grunting
 is most commonly 
heard in diseases with decreased functional residual capacity (e.g., 
pneumonia, pulmonary edema) or peripheral airway obstruction 
(e.g., bronchiolitis).
Respiratory Disease Manifesting as Respiratory 
Distress
Clinical examination is paramount in localizing the site of pathology 
and creating a differential diagnosis. Extrathoracic airway obstruction 
occurs anywhere above the thoracic inlet and is marked by inspiratory 
stridor, retractions, and prolongation of inspiration. In contrast, fea
-
tures of intrathoracic airway obstruction are prolongation of expiration 
and	expiratory	wheezing.	Typical	manifestations	of	alveolar	interstitial	
pathology are rapid, shallow respirations, chest wall retractions, and 
grunting (
Tables	86.1	and	86.2
).
 
Respiratory Distress Without Respiratory Disease
Although respiratory distress most frequently results from diseases of 
lungs, airways, and chest wall, pathology in other organ systems can 
manifest as respiratory distress and lead to misdiagnosis and inappro
-
priate management (
Table	86.3
). Respiratory distress resulting from 
heart failure or diabetic ketoacidosis may be misdiagnosed as asthma 
and improperly treated with albuterol, resulting in worsened hemody
-
namic state or ketoacidosis. Careful history and physical examination 
provide essential clues in avoiding misdiagnosis.
Cardiovascular Disease Manifesting as Respiratory 
Distress
A child with cardiovascular pathology may present with respiratory 
distress caused by either 
decreased lung compliance
 or 
cardiogenic shock
 
(
Table	86.4
). Diseases that result in increased pulmonary arterial blood 
flow (e.g., left- to- right shunts) or increased pulmonary venous pres
-
sure (e.g., left ventricular dysfunction from hypertension or myocar
-
ditis, obstructed total anomalous pulmonary venous return) cause an 
increase in pulmonary capillary pressure and transudation of fluid 
into the pulmonary interstitium and alveoli. The increased pulmonary 
blood and water content lead to decreased lung compliance and result 
in rapid shallow breathing.
It is important to recognize that interstitial lung edema may not 
only manifest as alveolar fluid but as small airway obstruction as well. 
Wheezing
 as a sign of congestive cardiac disease is common in infants 
and young children and should be recognized. Patients with cardiac 
lesions that result in low cardiac output often present in shock. For 
example, obstructive lesions of the left side of the heart (e.g., critical 
coarctation of the aorta) and acquired or congenital cardiomyopathy 
result in decreased perfusion and metabolic acidosis, as well as respira
-
tory distress because of chemoreceptor and baroreceptor stimulation. 
The likelihood of a particular cardiovascular illness manifesting as 
respiratory distress depends on age at presentation (
Table	86.5
).
 
Neurologic Disease Manifesting as Respiratory 
 
Distress
Central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction can lead to alterations in 
respiratory patterns and manifest as respiratory distress. Increased 
intracranial pressure (ICP) may manifest as respiratory distress. Early 
rise in ICP results in stimulation of respiratory centers, leading to 
increases in the rate 
(tachypnea)
 and depth 
(hyperpnea)
 of respira
-
tion. The resultant decrease in arterial blood partial pressure of carbon 
dioxide (Pa
co
2
) and elevation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pH leads 
to cerebral vasoconstriction and temporary amelioration of intracra
-
nial hypertension. Stereotypical respiratory patterns are associated 
Chapter 
86
Acute Care of Respiratory 
Distress and Failure
Alexandre T. Rotta, Martin C.J. Kneyber, 
and Ashok P. Sarnaik
Table 86.1 
 
  Typical Localizing Signs for Pulmonary Pathology
SITE OF PATHOLOGY
RESPIRATORY RATE
RETRACTIONS
AUDIBLE MANIFESTATION
Extrathoracic airway
↑
↑↑↑↑
Stridor
Intrathoracic extrapulmonary
↑
↑↑
Wheezing
Intrathoracic intrapulmonary
↑↑
↑↑
Wheezing
Alveolar or interstitial
↑↑↑
↑↑↑
Grunting, crackles
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86
 u 
Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure 
613
with dysfunction at various levels of the brain. Cerebral hemisphere 
and midbrain lesions result in hyperpnea and tachypnea. In such situ
-
ations, arterial blood gas (ABG) measurements typically show respi
-
ratory alkalosis without hypoxemia. Pathology affecting the pons and 
medulla manifests as irregular breathing patterns such as 
apneus
-
tic breathing
 (prolonged inspiration with brief expiratory periods), 
Cheyne- Stokes breathing
 (alternate periods of rapid and slow breath
-
ing), and irregular, ineffective breathing or apnea (
Table	86.6
). Along 
with respiratory changes, other manifestations of CNS dysfunction 
and increased ICP generally are present, such as focal neurologic signs, 
pupillary abnormalities, hypertension, and bradycardia (see 
Chapter 
82
). Occasionally, severe CNS dysfunction can result in 
neurogenic 
pulmonary edema
 and respiratory distress, which may follow exces
-
sive sympathetic discharge resulting in increased pulmonary venous 
hydrostatic pressure and increased pulmonary capillary permeability. 
Central neurogenic hyperventilation
 is characteristically observed in 
illnesses such as urea cycle defects and encephalitis. 
Bradycardia
 and 
apnea
 may be caused by CNS- depressant medications, poisoning, pro
-
longed hypoxia, trauma, or infection (see 
Table	86.2
).
 
      

Direct stimulation of respiratory centers resulting in respiratory 
alkalosis is encountered in intoxication involving agents such as 
salicylates and theophylline. Similarly, intoxication with general 
CNS stimulants, such as cocaine and amphetamines, may result in 
increased respiration. Presence of endogenous (e.g., organic acids) 
or exogenous (e.g., methanol, ethylene glycol, salicylates) toxins 
causes metabolic acidosis and compensatory hyperventilation, 
which can manifest as respiratory distress. ABG measurements 
show decreased pH and compensatory hypocarbia with normal 
oxygenation. Conversely, metabolic disorders with hyperammo
-
nemia cause respiratory alkalosis (decreased Pa
co
2
 with increased 
pH) as ammonia directly stimulates the respiratory centers. Cya
-
nide poisoning and methemoglobinemia may also produce respira
-
tory distress.
 
     
 
Sepsis
 and 
septic shock
 may cause respiratory distress from hypovo
-
lemic stimulation of baroreceptors, cytokine stimulation of respiratory 
centers, and lactic acidosis; they can also lead to 
acute respiratory 
distress syndrome
 (ARDS). Other indirect causes of ARDS include 
systemic inflammatory conditions, trauma, transfusion- related acute 
lung injury, and pancreatitis. Similarly, renal disease may manifest as 
respiratory distress by causing metabolic acidosis (e.g., renal tubular 
acidosis or renal failure) or hypertensive left ventricular failure and 
fluid overload.
 
RESPIRATORY FAILURE
Respiratory failure occurs when oxygenation and ventilation are insuf
-
ficient to meet the metabolic demands of the body. Respiratory failure 
may result from an abnormality in (1) lung and airways, (2) chest wall 
and muscles of breathing, or (3) central and peripheral chemorecep
-
tors. Clinical manifestations depend largely on the site of pathology. 
Although respiratory failure is traditionally defined as respiratory 
able 86.2 
 
  Examples of Anatomic Sites of Lesions Causing 
Respiratory Failure
LUNG
RESPIRATORY PUMP
CENTRAL AIRWAY 
 
OBSTRUCTION
THORACIC CAGE
Choanal atresia
Tonsilloadenoidal hypertrophy
Retropharyngeal/peritonsillar 
abscess
Laryngomalacia
Epiglottitis
Vocal cord paralysis
Laryngotracheitis
Subglottic stenosis
Vascular ring/pulmonary sling
Mediastinal mass
Foreign body
Kyphoscoliosis
Diaphragmatic hernia
Flail chest
Eventration of diaphragm
Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy
Prune- belly syndrome
Dermatomyositis
Abdominal distention
PERIPHERAL AIRWAY 
 
OBSTRUCTION
BRAINSTEM
Asthma
Bronchiolitis
Foreign body
Aspiration of gastric contents
Cystic fibrosis
α
1
- Antitrypsin deficiency
Arnold- Chiari malformation
Central hypoventilation syndrome
CNS depressants, including drug 
overdose
Trauma
Increased intracranial pressure
CNS infections
ALVEOLAR OR INTERSTITIAL 
DISEASE
SPINAL CORD
Lobar pneumonia
*
ARDS
Surfactant deficiency
Interstitial pneumonia
Hydrocarbon pneumonitis
Pulmonary hemorrhage/
hemosiderosis
Vaping lung injury
Smoke inhalation
Drowning
Trauma
Transverse myelitis
Spinal muscular atrophy
Poliomyelitis
Compression (tumor, abscess, 
bleed)
Acute flaccid myelitis
NEUROMUSCULAR
Phrenic nerve injury
Birth trauma
Infant botulism
Guillain- Barré syndrome
Muscular dystrophy
Myasthenia gravis
Organophosphate poisoning
*Including bacteria and viral; fungal or parasitic less common.
ARDS, Acute respiratory distress syndrome; CNS, central nervous system.
Table 86.3 
 
  Nonpulmonary Causes of Respiratory Distress
DOMAIN
EXAMPLE(S)
MECHANISM(S)
Cardiovascular
Left- to- right shunt
Congestive heart 
failure
Cardiogenic shock
↑
 Pulmonary blood/water 
content
Metabolic acidosis
Baroreceptor stimulation
CNS
Increased intracranial 
pressure
Encephalitis
Neurogenic pulmonary 
edema
Toxic encephalopathy
Stimulation of brainstem 
respiratory centers
Metabolic
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Organic acidemia
Hyperammonemia
Stimulation of central 
and peripheral 
chemoreceptors
Renal
Renal tubular acidosis
Stimulation of central 
and peripheral 
chemoreceptors
Hypertension
Left ventricular 
dysfunction 
→
 increased 
pulmonary blood/water 
content
Infection
Toxic shock syndrome
Septic shock
Meningococcemia
Cytokine stimulation of 
respiratory centers
Baroreceptor stimulation 
from shock
Metabolic acidosis
CNS, Central nervous system.
Courtesy Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

614 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
dysfunction resulting in arterial partial pressure of oxygen (Pa
o
2
) <60 
mm Hg when breathing ambient air and Pa
co
2
 >50 mm Hg resulting 
in acidemia, the patient’s general state, respiratory effort, and potential 
for impending exhaustion are more important indicators than ABG 
values.
Pathophysiology
Respiratory failure can be classified into 
hypoxic
 respiratory failure 
(failure of oxygenation) and 
hypercarbic
 respiratory failure (failure 
of ventilation). Systemic venous (pulmonary arterial) blood is arte
-
rialized through equilibration with alveolar gas in the pulmonary 
capillaries and is carried back to the heart by pulmonary veins. Arte
-
rial blood oxygen and carbon dioxide content are influenced by the 
composition of the inspired gas, effectiveness of alveolar ventilation, 
pulmonary capillary perfusion, and diffusion capacity of the alveolar 
capillary membrane. An abnormality in any of these steps can result 
in respiratory failure. 
Hypoxic respiratory failure
 results from intra
-
pulmonary shunting and venous admixture or insufficient diffusion of 
oxygen from alveoli into pulmonary capillaries. This physiology can 
be caused by small airways obstruction, increased barriers to diffusion 
(e.g., interstitial edema, fibrosis), and conditions in which alveoli are 
collapsed or filled with fluid (e.g., pneumonia, atelectasis, pulmonary 
edema). In most cases, hypoxic respiratory failure is associated with 
decreased functional residual capacity and can be managed by lung 
volume recruitment with positive pressure ventilation. 
Hypercarbic 
respiratory failure
 is caused by decreased minute ventilation (i.e., tidal 
volume multiplied by respiratory rate). This can result from centrally 
mediated disorders of respiratory drive, increased dead space ventila
-
tion, or obstructive airway disease. 
Hypoxic and hypercarbic respiratory 
failure may coexist as a combined failure of oxygenation and ventilation.
Ventilation- Perfusion Mismatch
For exchange of O
2
 and CO
2
 to occur, alveolar gas must be exposed to 
blood transiting in close proximity through the pulmonary capillar
-
ies. Both ventilation and perfusion are lower in nondependent areas 
(upper lobes in upright position) of the lung and higher in dependent 
areas (lower lobes in upright position). The difference in perfusion (
˙Q
)
 
is greater than the difference in ventilation (
˙V
). Perfusion in excess 
of ventilation results in incomplete arterialization of systemic venous 
(pulmonary arterial) blood and is referred to as 
venous admixture
. 
Perfusion of unventilated areas is referred to as 
intrapulmonary 
shunting
. Conversely, ventilation that is in excess of perfusion is 
wasted; that is, it does not contribute to gas exchange and is referred 
to as 
dead space ventilation
. Dead space ventilation results in return 
of greater amounts of atmospheric gas (which has not participated in 
gas exchange and has negligible CO
2
) back to the atmosphere during 
exhalation. The respiratory dead space is divided into the 
anatomic 
dead space
 and the 
alveolar dead space
. The 
anatomic dead space
 
includes the conducting airways from the nasopharynx to the terminal 
bronchioles, ends at the alveoli, and has no contact with the pulmonary 
capillary bed. The 
alveolar dead space
 refers to areas of the lung where 
alveoli are ventilated but not perfused. Under normal conditions, 
this usually occurs in West zone I, where alveolar pressure is greater 
than pulmonary capillary pressure, thus restricting blood flow. Under 
clinical conditions, this alveolar dead space may result from dynamic 
hyperinflation, high levels of positive end- expiratory pressure (PEEP), 
or large tidal volume in mechanically ventilated patients. Additionally, 
conditions that cause decreased pulmonary artery perfusion (e.g., pul
-
monary embolism, decreased cardiac output, hypovolemia) can result 
in alveolar dead space. The result is a decrease in mixed expired CO
2
 
(P
eco
2
) and an increase in the Pa
co
2
 − P
eco
2
 gradient. Dead space as 
a fraction of tidal volume (V
d
/V
t
) is calculated as:
(Pa
co
2
 
−
 P
eco
2
) 
÷
 Pa
co
2
Normal V
d
/V
t
 is approximately 0.33. Venous admixture and intra
-
pulmonary shunting predominantly affect oxygenation, resulting in 
an alveolar partial pressure of oxygen (P
ao
2
) to Pa
o
2
 (A- a
o
2
) gradi
-
ent without elevation in Pa
co
2
. This occurs due to greater ventilation 
of perfused areas, which is sufficient to normalize Pa
co
2
 but not Pa
o
2
 
because of their respective dissociation curves. The relative straight- line 
Table 86.4 
 
  Cardiovascular Pathology Manifesting as 
 
Respiratory Distress
I. DECREASED LUNG COMPLIANCE
A. Left- to- right shunts
 1.  Ventricular septal defect, atrial septal defect, patent ductus 
 
arteriosus, atrioventricular canal, truncus arteriosus
 2.  Cerebral or hepatic arteriovenous fistula
B. Ventricular failure
 1.  Left heart obstructive lesions
a. Aortic stenosis
b. Coarctation of the aorta
c. Interrupted aortic arch
d. Mitral stenosis
e. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
 2.  Myocardial infarction
a. Anomalous left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery 
(ALCAPA)
b. Ventriculocoronary arterial connections (coronary sinusoids)
 3.  Hypertension
a. Acute glomerulonephritis
 4.  Inflammatory/infectious
a. Myocarditis
b. Pericardial effusion
 5.  Idiopathic/genetic
a. Dilated cardiomyopathy
b. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
c. Takotsubo syndrome
C. Pulmonary venous obstruction
 1.  Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection with obstruction
 2.  Cor triatriatum
II. SHOCK RESULTING IN METABOLIC ACIDOSIS
A. Left heart obstructive lesions
B. Acute ventricular failure
 1.  Myocarditis, myocardial infarction
Table 86.5 
 
  Typical Chronology of Heart Disease 
 
Presentation in Children
AGE
MECHANISM
DISEASE
Newborn 
 
(1- 10 days)
↑
 Arteriovenous 
 
pressure difference
Arteriovenous 
 
malformation (brain, liver)
Ductal closure
Single ventricle lesions or 
severe ventricular outflow 
obstruction
Independent 
pulmonary and 
systemic blood flow
Transposition of the great 
arteries
Pulmonary venous 
obstruction
Total anomalous pulmonary 
venous return (TAPVR)
Young infant 
(1- 6 mo)
↓
 Pulmonary vascular 
resistance
Left- to- right shunt lesions
↓
 Pulmonary artery 
pressure
Anomalous left coronary 
 
artery from the pulmonary 
artery (ALCAPA)
Any age
Heart rate disturbance
Tachyarrhythmias or 
 
bradyarrhythmias
Infection
Myocarditis, endocarditis, 
pericarditis
Abnormal cardiac 
myocytes
Cardiomyopathy
Excess afterload
Hypertension
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86
 u 
Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure 
615
relationship of the hemoglobin- CO
2
 dissociation allows for averaging 
of capillary P
co
2
 (Pc
co
2
) from hyperventilated and hypoventilated 
areas. Because the association between oxygen tension and hemoglobin 
saturation plateaus with increasing Pa
o
2
 (i.e., “S- shaped” curve), the 
decreased hemoglobin- O
2
 saturation in poorly ventilated areas cannot 
be compensated for by well- ventilated areas where hemoglobin- O
2
 sat
-
uration has already reached near- maximum. This results in decreased 
arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation (Sa
o
2
) and Pa
o
2
. Elevation of Pa
co
2
 
in such situations is indicative of coincident alveolar hypoventilation. 
Examples of diseases leading to venous admixture include asthma and 
aspiration pneumonia and pulmonary embolism, and those of intra
-
pulmonary shunt include lobar pneumonia and ARDS.
 

Even if ventilation and perfusion are matched, gas exchange requires 
diffusion across the interstitial space between the alveoli and pulmo
-
nary capillaries. Under normal conditions, there is sufficient time for 
the pulmonary capillary blood to equilibrate with alveolar gas across 
the interstitial space. When the interstitial space is thickened by extrav
-
asated fluid or inflammatory cells, diffusion is impaired. Because the 
diffusion capacity of CO
2
 is 20 times greater than that of O
2
, diffusion 
defects manifest as hypoxemia rather than hypercarbia. Even with the 
administration of 100% oxygen, P
ao
2
 increases to approximately 660 
mm Hg from 100 mm Hg at sea level, and the concentration gradi
-
ent for diffusion of O
2
 is increased by only 6.6 times. Therefore, with 
diffusion defects, lethal hypoxemia will set in before clinically signifi
-
cant CO
2
 retention results. In fact, in such situations, Pa
co
2
 is often 
decreased because of the hyperventilation that accompanies hypox
-
emia. The presence of hypercarbia in diseases that impair diffusion is 
indicative of alveolar hypoventilation from coexisting airway obstruc
-
tion, CNS depression, or exhaustion. Examples of disease that impair 
diffusion are interstitial pneumonia, scleroderma, pulmonary lym
-
phangiectasia, and ARDS.
 
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Some patients with respiratory failure meet criteria for ARDS, a pul
-
monary condition of myriad etiologies characterized by hypoxemia of 
acute onset and chest radiograph findings consistent with acute pulmo
-
nary parenchymal disease (
Fig. 86.1
). ARDS affects both children and 
adults and can be the result of pulmonary (direct) or extrapulmonary 
(indirect) insults. Causes of direct ARDS include pneumonia, aspira
-
tion of gastric contents or toxic chemicals, lung contusion, and smoke 
inhalation. Causes of indirect ARDS include sepsis, transfusion- related 
lung injury, and pancreatitis, to name a few. The diagnostic criteria for 
pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome (PARDS) are outlined in 
Table	86.7
.
 
  
 
  Respiratory Patterns in Neurologic Disease
INJURY SITE
PATTERN
*
COMMENTS
Normal
Variable V
t
 with normal respiratory pauses and 
sighs
Cortex
Hyperpnea and tachypnea
Midbrain
Cheyne- Stokes breathing:
 Gradually increasing and decreasing V
t
Pons
Apneustic breathing:
 Prolonged inspiration followed by prolonged expiration
Medulla and 
pons
Biot breathing
: Rapid and irregular respirations with pauses
*Pattern tracings represent lung volume over time.
V
t
, Tidal volume.
ABCD
Fig. 86.1
 Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). 
A,
 Normal chest radiograph. 
B,
 Chest radiograph demonstrating bilateral alveolar infiltrates 
consistent with ARDS. 
C,
 Chest CT showing bilateral pneumonitis and consolidation with air bronchograms consistent with ARDS. 
D,
 Lung ultrasono
-
gram illustrating smooth pleural line, absence of horizontal A lines, and presence of vertical B lines suggestive of ARDS. 
(
Modified from MacSweeney 
R, McAuley DF. Acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
Lancet.
 2016;388:2416- 2430, 
Fig. 3.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

616 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
MONITORING A CHILD IN RESPIRATORY DISTRESS 
AND RESPIRATORY FAILURE
Clinical Examination
Clinical observation is the most important component of monitoring. 
The presence and magnitude of abnormal clinical findings, their pro
-
gression with time, and their temporal relation to therapeutic inter
-
ventions serve as guides to diagnosis and management (see 
Chapter 
421
). As much as possible, the child with respiratory distress or failure 
should be observed in the position of greatest comfort and in the least 
threatening environment.
Pulse oximetry
 is the most commonly used technique to monitor 
oxygenation. Noninvasive and safe, it is the standard of care in bedside 
monitoring of children during transport, procedural sedation, surgery, 
and critical illness. It indirectly measures arterial hemoglobin- O
2
 satura
-
tion by differentiating oxyhemoglobin from deoxygenated hemoglobin 
through their respective light absorption at wavelengths of 660 nm (red) 
and 940 nm (infrared). A pulsatile circulation is required to enable detec
-
tion of arterialized blood entering the capillary bed. Percentage of arte
-
rial oxyhemoglobin is reported as Sa
o
2
; however, the correct description 
is 
oxyhemoglobin saturation as measured by pulse oximetry
 (Sp
o
2
). Such 
precision is needed because Sp
o
2
 may not always reflect Sa
o
2
. It is impor
-
tant to be familiar with the hemoglobin- O
2
 dissociation curve (see 
Chap
-
ter 421
) to estimate Pa
o
2
 at a given oxyhemoglobin saturation. Because 
of the shape of the hemoglobin- O
2
 dissociation curve, changes in Pa
o
2
 
above 70 mm Hg are not readily identified by pulse oximetry. Also, at the 
same Pa
o
2
, there may be significant change in Sp
o
2
 at a different blood 
pH value. In most situations, Sp
o
2
 >95% is a reasonable goal, especially 
in emergency care. In patients receiving supplemental oxygen, a target 
saturation range of 94–96% should be considered in order to decrease 
unnecessary exposure that could result in oxygen toxicity. There are 
exceptions, such as in patients with large left- to- right shunts (e.g., ven
-
tricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus) or with single- ventricle 
cardiac lesions in whom the pulmonary and systemic circulations are 
receiving blood flow from the same ventricle (e.g., after stage I palliation 
for hypoplastic left heart syndrome). In the latter, a lower Sp
o
2
 (75–85%) 
is desired to avoid excessive blood flow to the lungs and reduced blood 
flow to the systemic circulation that can lead to morbidity and death. 
Because most commercially available pulse oximeters recognize all types 
of hemoglobin as either oxyhemoglobin or deoxygenated hemoglobin, 
they provide inaccurate information in the presence of carboxyhemo
-
globin and methemoglobin. In carbon monoxide poisoning, 
carboxyhe
-
moglobin
 absorbs light in the same (red) wavelength as oxyhemoglobin, 
leading to overestimation of oxygen saturation. 
Methemoglobin
 absorbs 
light in both the oxygenated and deoxygenated wavelengths, which can 
cause either an overestimation or underestimation of oxygen saturation. 
Data suggest that increasing methemoglobin concentrations tend to 
drive Sp
o
2
 toward 85%, no matter the actual percent of oxyhemoglo
-
bin. At lower methemoglobin levels, the pulse oximetry reading is falsely 
low, whereas high levels lead to a falsely high pulse oximetry reading. 
Newer specialized pulse oximeters can distinguish dyshemoglobinemias 
and prevent false readings, but their use is not widespread. It should be 
recognized that dangerous levels of hypercarbia may exist in patients 
with ventilatory failure, who have satisfactory Sp
o
2
 if they are receiving 
supplemental oxygen. Pulse oximetry should not be the only monitoring 
method in patients with primary ventilatory failure, such as neuromus
-
cular weakness and CNS depression. It is also unreliable in patients with 
poor perfusion and poor pulsatile flow to the extremities. Pulse oximetry 
may underestimate the degree of hypoxia in Black patients. Despite these 
limitations, pulse oximetry is a noninvasive, easily applicable, and effec
-
tive means of assessing oxygenation in most patients.
Volumetric capnography
 (end- tidal CO
2
 [Pet
co
2
] measurement) is 
helpful to noninvasively assess the effectiveness of ventilation and pul
-
monary circulation. The Pet
co
2
 can be used to determine the alveolar 
dead space fraction (V
D
/V
T
) and is calculated as follows:
V
D
/V
T
 = (Pa
co
2
 − Pet
co
2
) 
÷
 Pa
co
2
Changes in the alveolar dead space fraction usually correlate well 
with changes in the gradient of Pa
co
2
 and Pet
co
2
 (Pa
co
2
 − Pet
co
2
). 
Thus a change in Pa
co
2
 − Pet
co
2
 can be used as an index of changes 
in alveolar dead space. Diseases resulting in increased alveolar dead 
space (e.g., asthma with dynamic hyperinflation) or decreased pulmo
-
nary blood flow (e.g., pulmonary embolism, low cardiac output) lead 
to decreases in Pet
co
2
 and an increase in Pa
co
2
 − Pet
co
2
. Pet
co
2
 alone 
may overestimate adequacy of ventilation.
 
Table 86.7 
  Pediatric Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (PARDS 2.0) Definition
Age
Excludes patients with perinatal-related lung disease
Timing
Within 7 days of a known clinical insult
Origin of edema
Not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid overload
Chest imaging
New opacities (unilateral or bilateral) consistent with acute pulmonary parenchymal disease and which are not due 
primarily to atelectasis or pleural effusion
a
Oxygenation
b
IMV: OI 
≥
 4 or OSI 
≥
 5
NIV
c
: Pa
O
2
/ F
iO
2
 
≤
 300 or SPo
2
/
 F
iO
2
 
≤
 250
Stratiflcation of PARDS severity:
 Apply 
≥
 4 after initial diagnosis of PARDS
IMV PARDS
Mild/moderate:	OI	<16	or	OSI	<12
Severe: OI 
≥
16 or OSI 
≥
12
NIV PARDS
c
Mild/moderate: Pa
O
2
/ F
iO
2
>100	or	SP
O
2
/
 F
iO
2
	>150
Severe: Pa
O
2
/ F
iO
2
 
≤
 100 or SP
O
2
/
 F
iO
2
 
≤
 150
Special Populations
d
Cyanotic heart disease
Above criteria, with acute deterioration in oxygenation not explained by cardiac disease
Chronic lung disease
Above criteria, with acute deterioration in oxygenation from baseline
a
Children in resource-limited settings where imaging is not available who otherwise meet PARDS criteria are considered to have possible PARDS.
b
Oxygenation should be measured at steady state and not during transient desaturation episodes. When S
P
o
2
 is used, ensure that S
P
o
2
 is 
≤
 97%.
c
Diagnosis of PARDS on NIV (NIV PARDS) requires full facemask interface with continuous airway positive pressure/positive end-expiratory pressure 
≥
 5cm H
2
O.
d
Stratification of PARDS severity does not apply to these populations.
IMV, invasive mechanical ventilation; NIV noninvasive ventilation; OI, oxygenation index; OSI, oxygen saturation index; PARDS, pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome; S
P
o
2
, 
pulse oximeter oxygen saturation; Pa
O
2
, partial pressure of arterial oxygen; F
iO
2
, fraction of inspired oxygen.
OI = mean airway pressure (MAP) (cm H2O) × F
iO
2
 /Pa
O
2
 (mm Hg).
OSI = MAP (cm H2O) × F
iO
2
 /S
P
o
2
.
Adapted from Executive Summary of the Second International Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Pediatric Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (PALICC-2): 
Pediatr 
Crit Care Med
 2023;24:143–168.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86
 u 
Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure 
617
Blood Gas Abnormalities
Arterial blood gas analysis offers valuable assistance in diagnosis, mon
-
itoring, and management of a child in respiratory distress and failure. 
Because arterial blood sampling in children can be impractical with
-
out an indwelling catheter, a 
capillary blood gas
 (CBG) sample often 
is obtained, especially in emergency situations. A properly arterialized 
CBG sample obtained by warming the digit or heel that yields free- 
flowing blood is an acceptable surrogate. The blood sample needs to 
be processed without delay. CBG provides a good estimate of Pa
co
2
 
and arterial pH, but less so for Pa
o
2
. In patients who mainly require 
monitoring of ventilation (especially those whose oxygenation is being 
monitored with pulse oximetry), a 
venous blood gas
 sample provides a 
reasonable estimate of arterial pH and Pa
co
2
 values, provided tissue 
perfusion is adequate. Venous P
co
2
 (Pv
co
2
) is approximately 6 mm 
Hg higher and pH approximately 0.03 lower than the arterial values. 
Pv
o
2
 has a poor correlation with Pa
o
2
. Mixed venous O
2
 saturation 
obtained from a central venous catheter in the right atrium is a useful 
marker of the balance between oxygen delivery and oxygen consump
-
tion. In patients with a constant arterial O
2
 content and O
2
 consump
-
tion, mixed venous O
2
 saturation offers valuable information about 
cardiac output.
Blood gas analysis is important not only for determining the ade
-
quacy of oxygenation and ventilation but also for determining the site 
of respiratory pathology and planning treatment (see 
Chapter 421
). 
Briefly, in the presence of pure alveolar hypoventilation (e.g., airway 
obstruction above carina, decreased CO
2
 responsiveness, neuromus
-
cular weakness), the blood gas will show respiratory acidosis with an 
elevated Pa
co
2
 but a relative sparing of oxygenation. 
˙V/˙Q
 mismatch 
(peripheral airway obstruction, bronchopneumonia) will be reflected 
in increasing hypoxemia and variable levels of Pa
co
2
 (low, normal, 
high) depending on severity of disease. Intrapulmonary right- to- left 
shunting and diffusion defects (alveolar- interstitial diseases such as 
pulmonary edema, ARDS) will be associated with a large A- a
o
2
 gra
-
dient and hypoxemia with relative sparing of CO
2
 elimination, unless 
there is coincident fatigue or CNS depression.
 
Acid- Base Abnormalities
It is crucial to analyze the magnitude and appropriateness of changes 
in pH, Pa
co
2
, and bicarbonate concentration ([HCO
3
−
]) because they 
provide useful clues to the underlying pathophysiology and presence 
of	more	than	one	disorder.	To	do	so,	it	is	useful	to	assume	baseline	val
-
ues of pH 7.40, Pa
co
2
 40 mm Hg, and [HCO
3
−
] 24 mEq/L. Newborns 
have a lower renal threshold for bicarbonate and therefore have slightly 
different baseline values of pH 7.38, Pa
co
2
 35 mm Hg, and [HCO
3
−
] 
 
20 mEq/L.
Metabolic Acidosis with Respiratory Compensation
Patients with metabolic acidosis have decreased pH resulting from 
decreased serum [HCO
3
−
]. Chemoreceptor stimulation results in 
hyperventilation and respiratory compensation that may clinically 
manifest as respiratory distress. Normal compensation does not com
-
pletely correct the pH, but rather minimizes a change in pH that would 
otherwise occur without compensation. The adequacy of respira
-
tory compensation is judged by the extent of the decline in Pa
co
2
 in 
response to the decline in [HCO
3
−
] or pH. A normal compensation for 
metabolic acidosis results in a fall in Pa
co
2
 by 1.2 mm Hg for every 1 
mEq/L fall in [HCO
3
−
]. The most commonly used method to analyze 
the adequacy of respiratory compensation is Winter’s formula:
Pa
co
2
 mm Hg = (HCO
3
 
−
 
×
 1.5) 
+
 8 
±
 2
A quick method is to look at the last two digits of pH (provided it is 
not <7.10), which should be within 2 mm Hg of Pa
co
2
. For example, 
pH 7.27, Pa
co
2
 26 mm Hg, and [HCO
3
−
] 12 mEq/L represent meta
-
bolic acidosis with a normal respiratory compensation response. On 
the other hand, pH 7.15, Pa
co
2
 30 mm Hg, and [HCO
3
−
] 10 mEq/L 
constitutes metabolic acidosis with inadequate respiratory compensa
-
tion. The reasons for inadequate compensation include decreased CO
2
 
responsiveness (e.g., narcotic poisoning, cerebral edema), abnormali
-
ties of lungs and airways, or neuromuscular weakness. A decrease in 
Pa
co
2
 that is greater than what could be expected as a normal com
-
pensatory response to metabolic acidosis is indicative of a mixed dis
-
order. A pH 7.20, Pa
co
2
 15 mm Hg, and [HCO
3
−
] 7.5 mEq/L represent 
metabolic acidosis with a concomitant respiratory alkalosis because 
the decline in Pa
co
2
 is greater than what can be expected as normal 
compensation. A combination of metabolic acidosis and respiratory 
alkalosis is often encountered in serious conditions such as cardiogenic 
shock (e.g., stimulation of baroreceptors), sepsis, or toxic- metabolic 
states (e.g., salicylates, organic acidemia).
 
    
Patients with respiratory acidosis have decreased pH as a result of 
elevated Pa
co
2
. An acute increase in Pa
co
2
 of 10 mm Hg results in a 
decrease in pH by 0.08. Thus a child with severe critical asthma and 
a Pa
co
2
 of 60 mm Hg will have a blood pH of approximately 7.24. 
Chronically elevated (>3- 5 days) Pa
co
2
 is accompanied by renal com
-
pensation and increase in serum [HCO
3
−
], limiting the fall in pH to 
0.03 for every 10 mm Hg rise in Pa
co
2
. Thus an infant with broncho
-
pulmonary dysplasia who has a basal Pa
co
2
 of 60 mm Hg will have a 
blood pH of approximately 7.34. These findings are helpful in distin
-
guishing acute from chronic changes in Pa
co
2
. Also, for a given level 
of CO
2
 accumulation, a decrease in pH that is greater than expected is 
indicative of concomitant metabolic acidosis, and a decline in pH that 
is less than expected is caused by accompanying metabolic alkalosis.
 
Assessment of Oxygenation and Ventilation Deficits
For standardizing management, following clinical progress, and deter
-
mining prognosis for patients with defects in oxygenation or ven
-
tilation, the following indicators have been proposed, each with its 
strengths and limitations:
A- a
o
2
 
gradient
 is calculated by the subtraction, P
ao
2
 − Pa
o
2
. For 
the comparison to be valid, both values must be taken at the same 
time and with the same fraction of oxygen in the inspired gas 
(F
io
2
).
Pa
o
2
/F
io
2
 
ratio
 (P/F ratio) is calculated by dividing Pa
o
2
 by F
io
2
. The 
P/F ratio is the measure of oxygenation adequacy employed in the 
Berlin definition of ARDS in adults (
Table 86.8
). According to the 
Berlin definition, a P/F 
≤
300 mm Hg is consistent with mild ARDS, 
a P/F ratio between 100 and 200 mm Hg is consistent with mod
-
erate ARDS, and a P/F ratio 
≤
100 mm Hg is consistent with severe 
ARDS. Although the intent is to gauge the degree of 
˙V/˙Q
 mismatch, 
intrapulmonary shunt, and diffusion defect, the status of alveolar hy
-
poventilation could have a significant impact on P/F ratio.
Sp
o
2
/F
io
2
 
ratio
 may be used as a surrogate measure of oxygenation 
adequacy when Pa
o
2
 is not available. It is calculated by dividing 
the pulse oximeter saturation by the F
io
2
. P/F ratios of 200 mm 
Table 86.8 
 
  The Berlin Definition of ARDS
	•		Acute	onset	(within	7	days	of	new	or	worsening	respiratory	
 
symptoms)
	•		Bilateral	radiographic	opacities	that	are	not	fully	explained	by	
 
effusion, atelectasis, or masses
	•		Arterial	hypoxemia	defined	by	thresholds:
Mild:
	200	<Pao
2
/Fio
2
 ratio 
≤
300 mm Hg, on CPAP* or PEEP
†
 
≥
5 cm 
H
2
O (observed mortality 27%)
Moderate:
	100	<Pao
2
/Fio
2
 ratio 
≤
200 mm Hg, on PEEP 
≥
5 cm H
2
O 
(observed mortality 32%)
Severe:
 Pao
2
/Fio
2
 ratio 
≤
100 mm Hg, on PEEP 
≥
5 cm H
2
O 
 
(observed mortality 45%)
	•		Identified	risk	factor	for	ARDS	(if	no	clear	risk	factor,	exclude	heart	
failure as a cause)
	•		Not	exclusively	the	result	of	cardiac	causes
ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; 
F
iO
2
, fraction of inspired oxygen; Pa
O
2
, partial pressure of oxygen; PEEP, positive end- 
expiratory pressure.
*Delivered by noninvasive or invasive ventilation.
†
Delivered by invasive mechanical ventilation.
From Meyer NJ, Gattinoni L, Calfee CS. Acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
Lancet
. 
2021;398:622- 637, Panel 1, p. 622.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

618 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Hg and 300 mm Hg correlate approximately with S/F ratios of 
235 and 315, respectively. This relationship is most valid for Sp
o
2
 
values between 80% and 97%.
Pa
o
2
/P
ao
2
 
ratio
 is determined by dividing Pa
o
2
 by P
ao
2
. The level 
of alveolar ventilation is accounted for in the calculation of Pa
o
2
. 
Therefore Pa
o
2
/P
ao
2
 is more indicative of 
˙V/˙Q
 mismatch and al
-
veolar capillary integrity.
Oxygenation index
 (OI) is aimed at standardizing oxygenation to 
the level of concomitant therapeutic interventions (e.g., mean air
-
way pressure [MAP] and F
io
2
) that influence oxygenation. None 
of the indicators of oxygenation mentioned earlier take into ac
-
count the degree of positive pressure respiratory support. The OI 
is calculated as follows:
OI = (MAP 
×
 F
io
2
 
×
 100) / Pa
o
2
Oxygenation saturation index
 (OSI) is analogous to OI and useful 
when Pa
o
2
 measurements are not available. It substitutes Sp
o
2
 for 
Pa
o
2
 in the formula as follows:
OSI = (MAP 
×
 F
io
2
 
×
 100) / Sp
o
2
Both the OI and OSI are used in the Pediatric Acute Lung Injury 
Consensus Conference (PALICC) definition of PARDS. The main limi
-
tation of OI and OSI is that level of ventilation is not accounted for in 
the assessment.
 
MANAGEMENT
The goal of management for respiratory distress and respiratory failure 
is to ensure a patent airway and provide necessary support for adequate 
oxygenation of the blood and removal of CO
2
. Compared with hypercap
-
nia, 
hypoxemia
 is a life- threatening condition; therefore initial therapy for 
respiratory failure should be aimed at ensuring adequate oxygenation.
Oxygen Administration
Supplemental oxygen administration is the least invasive and most eas
-
ily tolerated therapy for hypoxemic respiratory failure. 
Nasal cannula
 
oxygen provides low levels of oxygen supplementation and is easy to 
administer. Oxygen is humidified in a bubble humidifier and deliv
-
ered via nasal prongs inserted into the nares. In children, a flow rate 
<5 L/min is most often used because of increasing nasal irritation with 
higher flow rates. A common formula for an estimation of the F
io
2
 
during use of a nasal cannula in older children and adults follows:
F
io
2
 (as a percentage) = 21% + (Nasal cannula flow [L/min] 
×
 3)
The typical F
io
2
 value (expressed as a percentage rather than a frac
-
tion of 1) using this method is between 23% and 40%, although the 
F
io
2
 varies according to the size of the child, the respiratory rate, and 
the volume of air moved with each breath. In a young child, because 
typical nasal cannula flow rates are a greater percentage of total minute 
ventilation, significantly higher F
io
2
 may be provided. Alternatively, 
a 
simple mask
 may be used, which consists of a mask with open side 
ports and a valveless oxygen source. Variable amounts of room air are 
entrained through the ports and around the side of the mask, depend
-
ing on the fit, size, and minute volume of the child. Oxygen flow rates 
administered through a simple mask generally vary from 5 to 10 L/
min, yielding typical F
io
2
 values (expressed as a percentage rather than 
a fraction of 1) between 30% and 65%. If more precise delivery of oxy
-
gen is desired, other mask devices should be used.
A 
Venturi mask
 provides preset F
io
2
 through a mask and reservoir 
system by entraining precise flow rates of room air into the reservoir 
along with high- flow oxygen. The adapter at the end of each mask res
-
ervoir determines the flow rate of entrained room air and the subse
-
quent Fi
o
2
 adapters provide Fi
o
2
 of 0.30- 0.50. Oxygen flow rates of 5- 10 
L/min are recommended to achieve the desired Fi
o
2
 and to prevent 
rebreathing. Partial rebreather and non- rebreather masks use a reser
-
voir bag attached to a mask to provide higher F
io
2
. 
Partial rebreather 
masks
 have two open exhalation ports and contain a valveless oxygen 
reservoir bag. Some exhaled gas can mix with reservoir gas, although 
most exhaled gas exits the mask via the exhalation ports. Through these 
same ports, room air is entrained, and the partial rebreather mask can 
provide F
io
2
 up to 0.60 for as long as oxygen flow is adequate to keep 
the bag from collapsing (typically 10- 15 L/min). As with nasal cannu
-
las, smaller children with smaller tidal volumes entrain less room air, 
and their delivered F
i
o
2
 will be higher. 
Non- rebreather masks
 include 
two one- way valves, one between the oxygen reservoir bag and the 
mask and the other on one of the two exhalation ports. This arrange
-
ment minimizes mixing of exhaled and fresh gas and entrainment of 
room air during inspiration. The second exhalation port has no valve, 
a safeguard to allow some room air to enter the mask in the event of 
disconnection from the oxygen source. A non- rebreather mask can 
provide F
io
2
 up to 0.95. The use of a non- rebreather mask in conjunc
-
tion with an oxygen blender allows delivery of F
io
2
 between 0.50 and 
0.95 (
Table	86.9
). When supplemental oxygen alone is inadequate to 
improve oxygenation, or when ventilation impairments coexist, addi
-
tional therapies may be necessary.
 
Airway Adjuncts
Maintenance of a patent airway is a critical step in establishing adequate 
oxygenation and ventilation. Artificial pharyngeal airways may be use
-
ful in patients with oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway obstruc
-
tion and in those with neuromuscular weakness in whom inherent 
extrathoracic airway resistance contributes to respiratory compromise. 
An 
oropharyngeal airway
 is a stiff plastic spacer with grooves along 
each side that is placed in the mouth to run from the teeth along the 
tongue to its base just above the vallecula. The spacer prevents the 
tongue from opposing the posterior pharynx and occluding the airway. 
Because the tip sits at the base of the tongue, it is usually not tolerated 
by patients who are awake or whose gag reflex is strong. The 
nasopha
-
ryngeal airway
, or 
nasal trumpet,
 is a flexible tube that can be inserted 
into the nose to run from the nostril along the top of the hard and soft 
palate with the tip ending in the hypopharynx. It is useful in bypassing 
obstruction from enlarged adenoids or from contact of the soft palate 
with the posterior pharynx. Because it is inserted past the adenoids, a 
nasopharyngeal airway should be used with caution in patients with 
bleeding tendencies.
 
Inhaled Gases
Helium- oxygen mixture
 (heliox) is useful in overcoming airway 
obstruction and improving ventilation. Helium is much less dense 
and slightly more viscous than nitrogen. When substituted for nitro
-
gen in the inspired gas, helium helps maintain laminar flow across an 
obstructed airway, decreases airway resistance, and improves ventila
-
tion. It is especially helpful in diseases of large airways obstruction in 
which turbulent airflow is more common, such as acute laryngotra
-
cheobronchitis,	subglottic	stenosis,	and	vascular	ring.	To	be	effective,	
helium should be administered in concentrations of at least 60%, so 
associated hypoxemia may limit its use in patients requiring >40% 
oxygen.
Table 86.9 
 
  Approximate Oxygen Delivery According to 
Device and Flow Rates in Infants and Older 
Children
*
DEVICE
FLOW (
L/min
)
F
io
2
 DELIVERED
Nasal cannula
0.1- 6
0.21- 0.4
Simple face mask
5- 10
0.4- 0.6
Partial rebreather
6- 15
0.55- 0.7
Non- rebreather
6- 15
0.7- 0.95
Venturi mask
5- 10
0.25- 0.5
Hood/tent
7- 12
0.21- 1.0
High- flow systems
1- 60
0.21- 1.0
*Individual delivery varies and depends on the patient’s size, respiratory rate, and gas 
volume moved with every breath.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86
 u 
Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure 
619
Inhaled nitric oxide
 (iNO) is a powerful pulmonary vasodilator. Its 
use may improve pulmonary blood flow and 
˙V/˙Q
 matching in patients 
with diseases that elevate pulmonary vascular resistance, such as per
-
sistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn, primary pulmonary 
hypertension, and secondary pulmonary hypertension from chronic 
excess pulmonary blood flow (e.g., ventriculoseptal defect) or collagen 
vascular diseases. iNO is administered in doses ranging generally from 
5 to 20 parts per million of inspired gas. Although administration of 
iNO to unintubated patients is possible, it is most commonly used in 
patients undergoing mechanical ventilation via an endotracheal tube.
 
Positive Pressure Respiratory Support
Noninvasive positive pressure respiratory support is useful in treating 
both hypoxemic and hypoventilatory respiratory failure. Positive air
-
way pressure helps with aeration of partially atelectatic or fluid- filled 
alveoli, prevention of alveolar collapse at end exhalation, and increase 
in functional residual capacity (FRC). These actions improve pulmo
-
nary compliance and hypoxemia, and decrease intrapulmonary shunt. 
In addition, positive pressure ventilation is useful in preventing col
-
lapse of extrathoracic airways by maintaining positive airway pressure 
during inspiration. Improving compliance and overcoming airway 
resistance also improves tidal volume and, therefore, ventilation.
A 
high- flow nasal cannula (HFNC)
 delivers conditioned (heated 
and humidified) gas at flows generally ranging from 0.5 to 2 L/kg/min 
up to a maximum of 60 L/min. The F
io
2
 can be adjusted by provision 
of gas flow through an oxygen blender, or directly, when a dedicated 
commercial high- flow system is employed. A properly sized cannula 
for HFNC support should have prongs that occupy no more than 50% 
of the cross- sectional area of the nostrils, thus allowing for ample leak
-
age of gas (open system). Therefore although elevated pressures may 
be generated in areas of the nasopharynx, very low levels of positive 
expiratory pressure (<1 cm H
2
O) thought to be clinically insignificant 
are transmitted to the intrathoracic airway. The principal mechanisms 
of action of HFNC are washout of CO
2
 from the pharyngeal anatomic 
dead space and facilitation of gas movement across the nasopharyn
-
geal airway resistor. This is in contrast to 
continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP)
, a clinically equivalent support modality predicated 
on the use of a tight- fitting interface (closed system) in the form of 
nasal prongs, masks, or helmet. CPAP creates a stable level of operator- 
selected airway pressure that is transmitted to the intrathoracic airway. 
CPAP levels of 6- 7 cm H
2
O have been shown to unload the diaphragm 
and decrease work of breathing in infants with bronchiolitis. CPAP is 
most useful in diseases of mildly decreased lung compliance and low 
FRC, such as bronchiolitis with atelectasis and pneumonia. Patients 
with diseases of extrathoracic airway obstruction, in which extratho
-
racic negative airway pressures during inspiration result in airway 
narrowing (e.g., laryngotracheitis, laryngomalacia, obstructive sleep 
apnea, postextubation airway edema), may also benefit from CPAP. 
Potential risks include nasal irritation, pressure injury, hyperinflation 
from excessive CPAP in smaller patients, and abdominal distention 
from swallowed air.
Noninvasive positive airway pressure ventilation (NIPPV)
 pro
-
vides positive airway pressure during exhalation and a higher pressure 
that supports inspiration, also termed 
bilevel noninvasive ventilation
 
(see 
Chapter 86.1
).
 
Endotracheal Intubation and Mechanical Ventilation
When hypoxemia or significant hypoventilation persists despite the 
interventions already described, endotracheal intubation and mechan
-
ical ventilation are indicated. Additional indications for intubation 
include maintaining airway patency in patients who have the potential 
for airway compromise, such as those with actual or potential neuro
-
logic deterioration, and in patients with hemodynamic instability.
Proper monitoring is essential to ensuring a safe and successful 
endotracheal intubation. Pulse oximetry, heart rate, and blood pressure 
monitoring are mandatory and should be forgone only in situations 
calling for emergency intubation. All necessary equipment, including 
bag-	mask	ventilation	device,	laryngoscope,	endotracheal	tube	(ETT)	
with stylet, and suction equipment, must be available and working 
properly before intubation. The proper internal diameter (ID) for the 
ETT	can	be	estimated	using	the	following	formula:
ID = (Age [yr]/4)+4
Table	86.10
 provides average values for age, size, and depth of inser
-
tion for tracheal tubes. Preoxygenation of the patient with high F
io
2
 
is essential and will allow maximum procedure time before the onset 
of hypoxemia. Although intubation can be accomplished without 
sedation and pharmacologic paralysis in selected patients, the physi
-
ologic benefits of these measures to the patient and to the facilitation 
of the intubation usually far outweigh the risks. Administration of a 
sedative and analgesic followed by a neuromuscular- blocking agent is 
a common pharmacologic regimen for facilitating intubation. In fact, 
sedation and paralysis with neuromuscular blocking agents should be 
considered standard unless contraindicated. The particular type and 
dose of each agent often depends on the underlying disease and clini
-
cian preference. 
Table	86.11
 lists commonly used agents. 
Dexmedeto
-
midine
 has been a standard sedating agent for maintenance during 
mechanical ventilation. An alternative to this pharmacologic approach 
is 
rapid sequence intubation
, used when endotracheal intubation 
is urgent or the patient is suspected of having a full stomach and at 
increased risk of aspiration (see 
Chapter 79
).
Once adequate sedation and/or paralysis has been achieved, ven
-
tilation should be assisted with a 
bag- mask device
. After optimal 
preoxygenation, intubation can be performed. The clinician uses the 
dominant hand to open the patient’s mouth and insert the laryngo
-
scope blade gently along the tongue to its base. The airway opening 
can be visualized by lifting up and away from the clinician, along the 
axis of the laryngoscope handle. When a 
straight
 (Miller) laryngoscope 
blade is used to visualize the glottis, the tip of the blade lifts the epi
-
glottis anteriorly. When a 
curved
 (Macintosh) blade is used to visualize 
the glottis, the tip of the blade should be advanced into the vallecula 
and then lifted. Secretions often obscure visualization at this step and 
should be suctioned clear. Once clear visualization of the vocal cords is 
accomplished,	the	ETT	can	be	placed	through	the	vocal	cords.	Rapid	
confirmation	of	ETT	placement	is	essential	and	should	be	assessed	
by as many of the following steps as possible: (1) presence of exhaled 
CO
2
 determined by a colorimetric device, capnometry, or, preferably, 
capnography,	attached	in-	line	with	the	ETT;	(2)	auscultation	of	both	
lung fields for equal breath sounds and the epigastrium; (3) bilateral 
chest	wall	expansion;	and	(4)	condensation	(misting)	inside	the	ETT.	
An increasing heart rate, if heart rate had decreased before or during 
able 86.10 
 
  Average Size and Depth Dimensions for 
 
Tracheal Tubes
PATIENT AGE
INTERNAL 
DIAMETER 
(
mm
)
OROTRACHEAL 
DEPTH (
cm
)
NASOTRACHEAL 
DEPTH (
cm
)
Premature
2.0- 3.0
8- 9
9- 10
Full- term 
neonate
3.0- 3.5
10
11
6 mo
4.0
11
13
12- 24 mo
4.5
13- 14
16- 17
4 yr
5.0
15
17- 18
6 yr
5.5
17
19- 20
8 yr
6.0
19
21- 22
10 yr
6.5
20
22- 23
12 yr
7.0
21
23- 24
14 yr
7.5
22
24- 25
Adult
8.0- 9.0
23- 25
25- 28
Courtesy Dr. Ashok Sarnaik.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

620 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
the attempt, and a rising or normal Sp
o
2
 reading are suggestive of suc
-
cessful tube placement. Preoxygenation may significantly delay any 
drop in Sp
o
2
 with improper tube placement, leading to a delay in its 
recognition.	A	properly	placed	ETT	should	be	well	secured	to	avoid	
displacement or dislodgement. As soon as feasible, a chest radiograph 
should	also	be	obtained	to	confirm	proper	position	of	the	ETT,	which	
should lie with the tip about halfway between the thoracic inlet and the 
carina (see 
Chapter 79
).
 
Transient Manual Ventilation in Immediate 
 
Preintubation and Postintubation Periods
Establishment	of	supportive	ventilation	via	bag-	mask	or	bag-	ETT	is	
required before transport of the patient to a setting of continued critical 
care. The technique of manual ventilation should take into account the 
underlying pathology. Mechanical ventilation of patients with diseases 
characterized by low FRC (e.g., pneumonia, pulmonary edema, ARDS) 
should include the application of PEEP to prevent alveolar derecruit
-
ment. Lung volume recruitment can be accomplished with a PEEP 
valve on a self- inflating ventilation bag or by careful manipulation of 
exhaust gas using an anesthesia bag. Such diseases are also character
-
ized by a short time constant for lung deflation and therefore are best 
managed with relatively small tidal volumes and high ventilation rates.
In contrast, diseases characterized by airway obstruction, such as 
critical asthma, have prolonged deflation time constants and are there
-
fore best managed with relatively slow rates and high tidal volumes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
86.1
  Mechanical Ventilation
Martin C.J. Kneyber, Ashok P. Sarnaik, and 
 
Alexandre T. Rotta
The decision to institute mechanical ventilation is based mainly on 
the need to assist native pulmonary function in patients with acute 
respiratory failure; supporting performance of the left ventricle (LV), 
decreasing metabolic demand, and modulating of cerebral blood flow 
in intracranial hypertension are additional indications. Respiratory 
distress leading to fatigue and impending exhaustion are also indi
-
cations for respiratory support, even in the presence of adequate gas 
exchange. Although there are no absolute criteria for derangement of 
gas exchange, Pa
o
2
 <60 mm Hg while breathing >60% oxygen, Pa
co
2
 
>60 mm Hg, and pH <7.25 are often used in the decision- making to 
institute respiratory support. Positive pressure ventilation is a power
-
ful means of decreasing LV afterload, and it is used for this purpose 
in patients with cardiogenic shock resulting from LV dysfunction. 
Mechanical ventilation is also used in patients whose breathing is 
unreliable (e.g., unconscious patients, those with neuromuscular dys
-
function) and when deliberate hyperventilation is desired, such as in 
patients with intracranial hypertension.
Mechanical ventilation is not intended to normalize gas exchange. 
The goals are to maintain sufficient oxygenation and ventilation to 
ensure tissue viability until the disease process that has compromised 
the patient’s lung function has resolved, while minimizing exces
-
sive work of breathing and complications. When precisely employed, 
mechanical ventilation is a lifesaving intervention, yet care must be 
taken to avoid ventilator- induced lung injury (VILI). Several factors 
have been identified as contributors to VILI. These include lung strain 
from the delivery of excessive tidal volume 
(volutrauma)
, injury from 
the repetitive opening and closing of alveoli 
(atelectrauma)
, injury 
from excessive pressure delivery 
(barotrauma)
, local and systemic 
cytokine release 
(biotrauma)
, and damage caused by oxygen toxicity 
(
Figs. 86.2 and 86.3
).
BASIC CONCEPTS OF VENTILATOR MANAGEMENT
Equation of Motion
A pressure gradient is required for air to move from one place to 
another. During natural spontaneous ventilation, inspiration results 
from generation of negative intrapleural pressure from contraction of 
the diaphragm and intercostal muscles, drawing air from the atmo
-
sphere across the airways into the alveoli. During mechanical ventila
-
tion, inspiration results from positive pressure created by compressed 
gases through the ventilator, which pushes air across the airways into 
alveoli. In both spontaneous and mechanical ventilation, exhalation 
results from alveolar pressure generated by the elastic recoil of the lung 
Table 86.11 
 
  Medications Commonly Used for Intubation
DRUG
DOSE
ONSET (
min
)
DURATION (
min
)
COMMENTS
SEDATIVES/ANESTHETICS
Midazolam
0.1 mg/kg IV
3- 5
60- 120
Amnesia
Respiratory depression
Lorazepam
0.1 mg/kg IV
3- 5
120- 240
Amnesia
Respiratory depression
Ketamine
1- 2 mg/kg IV
4- 6 mg/kg IM
2- 3
10- 15
↑
 HR, BP, and ICP
Bronchodilation, sialorrhea
Propofol
1- 3 mg/kg IV
0.5- 2
10- 15
↓
 BP
Apnea
Thiopental
4- 7 mg/kg IV
0.5- 1
5- 10
↓
 BP
Apnea
ANALGESICS
Fentanyl
2- 5 μg/kg IV
3- 5
30- 90
Respiratory depression
Chest wall rigidity
Morphine
0.1 mg/kg IV
5- 15
120- 240
↓
 BP
Respiratory depression
NEUROMUSCULAR BLOCKING AGENTS
Vecuronium
0.1 mg/kg IV
1.5-2
30- 75
↑
 HR
Renal elimination
Rocuronium
0.6- 1.2 mg/kg IV
1 mg/kg IM
1-1.5
15- 60
↑
 HR
Renal elimination
Cisatracurium
0.1 mg/kg IV
3-5
25- 30
Histamine release
Nonrenal elimination
BP, Blood pressure; HR, heart rate; ICP, intracranial pressure; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86
 u 
Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure 
621
and the chest wall. Pressure necessary to move a given amount of air 
into the lung is determined by two factors: lung and chest wall elastance 
and airway resistance. 
Figure 86.4
 describes the relationship in pres
-
sure gradient, compliance, and resistance. 
Elastance
—defined	as	the	
change in pressure (
Δ
P) divided by the change in volume (
Δ
V)—refers	
to the property of a substance to oppose deformation. It is opposite of 
compliance
 (
Δ
V ÷ 
Δ
P), the property of a substance to allow distention 
or lengthening when subjected to pressure. Compliance (C) is there
-
fore expressed as 1/elastance.
The pressure needed to overcome tissue elastance is measured in 
conditions in which there is no flow (at end inspiration and end expi
-
ration) and is therefore a reflection of static conditions in the lung. It 
is influenced by tidal volume (V
t
) and compliance (P = 
Δ
V ÷ C). It 
is increased with high V
t
 and low compliance. This pressure gradi
-
ent is used to calculate the static compliance of the respiratory system 
(C
STAT
).
Resistance
 (R) refers to the opposition to generation of flow. It is 
measured as the amount of pressure needed to generate a unit of flow 
(
Δ
P ÷ 
Δ
Flow). Pressure needed to overcome airway resistance is calcu
-
lated as flow multiplied by resistance. Because this pressure is needed 
only when the flow is occurring through the airways, it is referred to 
as the 
dynamic component
. Pressure to overcome flow- resistive proper
-
ties is measured when there is maximum flow and is therefore under 
dynamic conditions. It is increased in conditions with greater airway 
resistance and flow rate. Flow rate depends on the time allowed for 
inspiration and expiration. At higher respiratory rates, there is less 
time available for each inspiration and expiration, necessitating higher 
flows; therefore higher pressure is required to overcome flow- resistive 
properties. The pressure gradient necessary to move air from one place 
to another is the sum of pressure needed to overcome the elastic and 
flow- resistive properties of the lung. This pressure gradient is taken 
into account to calculate the dynamic compliance of the respiratory 
system (C
DYN
). The difference in change in pressure between static 
conditions and dynamic conditions is attributable to airway resistance.
 
Functional Residual Capacity
During inspiration, oxygen- enriched gas enters alveoli. During exha
-
lation, oxygen continues to be removed by the pulmonary capillary 
Zone of
over-distensionZone ofatelectasisBCA
Fig. 86.2
 Atelectrauma. The interface between collapsed and con
-
solidated lung 
(A)
 and overdistended lung units 
(B)
 is heterogeneous 
and unstable. Depending on ambient conditions, this region is prone to 
cyclic recruitment and derecruitment and localized asymmetric stretch 
of lung units 
(C)
 immediately apposed to regions of collapsed lung. 
(
From Pinhu L, Whitehead T, Evans T, et al. Ventilator- associated lung 
injury. 
Lancet.
 2003;361:332- 340.
)
Deflation
Volume
PressureZone of recruitmentand derecruitmentZone of
over-distension
InflationUpper inflectionpointLower inflection point
Volume
PEEPP
max
Upper inflectionpointLower
inflection
point
Fig. 86.3
 Pulmonary pressure- volume relation in a patient with acute 
lung injury. 
Top,
 The lower inflection point is typically 12- 18 cm H
2
O 
and the upper inflection point 26- 32 cm H
2
O. 
Bottom,
 Specific protec
-
tive ventilation strategies require that positive end- expiratory pressure 
(PEEP) is set just above the lower inflection point and the pressure limit 
(P
max
) just below the upper inflection point. Thus the lung is ventilated 
in the safe zone between the zone of recruitment and derecruitment 
and the zone of overdistention, and both high- volume and low- volume 
injuries are avoided. This zone is located on the deflation limb of the 
pressure- volume curve, making use of the pulmonary hysteresis. 
(
From 
Pinhu L, Whitehead T, Evans T, et al. Ventilator- associated lung injury. 
Lancet.
 2003;361:332- 340.
)
Resistance H11005Elastance (inverse of Compliance)DynamicprocessDelta pressureDelta flowCompliance H11005Static
process
Delta volumeDelta pressurePressure gradient H11005H11001      (Flow H11003 resistance)Delta volumeVolumecompliance
Elastic propertiesFlow-resistive properties1.  Pressure gradient is required to move air from one place to another2.  Movement of air is opposed by flow-resistive and elastic properties
     of the system
Fig. 86.4
 Equation of motion. A pressure gradient is required to 
move air from one place to another. In the lungs, the required pres
-
sure gradient must overcome the lung and chest wall elastance (static 
component) and the flow- resistive properties (dynamic component). 
The static component is increased in alveolar interstitial diseases and 
stiff chest wall, whereas the dynamic component is increased with air
-
way obstruction.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

622 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
circulation. Functional residual capacity (FRC) is the volume of gas 
left in the alveoli at end expiration; in mechanically ventilated patients, 
it is generally referred to as 
end- expiratory lung volume
 (EELV). It is 
the only source of gas available for gas exchange during exhalation. 
In diseases with decreased FRC (e.g., pediatric acute respiratory dis
-
tress syndrome [PARDS], pulmonary edema), P
ao
2
 declines sharply 
throughout	expiration,	resulting	in	hypoxemia.	Two	ventilator	strat
-
egies used to improve oxygenation in such situations are the appli
-
cation of PEEP and increasing the 
inspiratory time
	(T
i
) (
Fig. 86.5
). 
Positive end- expiratory pressure (PEEP) increases EELV by stabilizing 
recruited	alveoli,	whereas	a	longer	T
i
 allows longer exposure of pulmo
-
nary capillary blood to a higher concentration of O
2
 during inspiration 
(see also 
Chapter 421
).
 
Time Constant
At the beginning of inspiration, the atmospheric pressure is higher 
than the pressure in the alveoli, resulting in movement of air into the 
alveoli. During mechanical ventilation, the ventilator circuit serves as 
the patient’s atmosphere. As alveoli expand with air, the alveolar pres
-
sure rises throughout inspiration until it equilibrates with the ventila
-
tor pressure, at which time airflow ceases. Expiration starts when the 
ventilator pressure falls below the alveolar pressure. Alveolar pressure 
decreases throughout expiration until it reaches the ventilator pressure, 
at which time no further egress of air from the alveoli occurs. If inspira
-
tion or expiration is terminated before pressure equilibration between 
alveoli and the ventilator is allowed to occur, alveolar expansion dur
-
ing inspiration or alveolar emptying during expiration is incomplete. 
Incomplete inspiration results in delivery of decreased V
t
, whereas 
incomplete expiration is associated with air trapping and the presence 
of residual PEEP in the alveoli that is greater than the PEEP set at the 
ventilator, referred to as 
auto- PEEP
. Some time is required for pres
-
sure equilibration to occur between alveoli and the atmosphere, which 
is reflected in the 
time constant
	(TC).	It	takes	3	TCs	for	95%	(and	5	
TCs	for	99%)	of	pressure	equilibration	to	occur.	The	TC	depends	on	
compliance (C) and resistance (R), and their relationship is depicted in 
Figure 86.6
.	TC	is	calculated	as	compliance	multiplied	by	resistance	(C	
× R) and is measured in seconds.
Diseases with decreased compliance (increased elastance) are char
-
acterized by high elastic recoil pressure, which results in more rapid 
equilibration of alveolar and ventilator pressures, thereby decreas
-
ing	TC.	Diseases	with	increased	airway	resistance	are	associated	with	
slower flow rates, require longer time for movement of air from one 
place	to	another,	and	therefore	have	increased	TC.	Airways	expand	
during inspiration and narrow during expiration. Therefore expiratory 
time	constant	(TC
e
)	is	longer	than	inspiratory	time	constant	(TC
i
). 
In intrathoracic airway obstruction (e.g., asthma, bronchiolitis, aspi
-
rated foreign body), airway narrowing is much more pronounced dur
-
ing	expiration.	Therefore	although	both	TC
e
	and	TC
i
 are prolonged in 
such	diseases,	TC
e
	is	much	more	prolonged	than	TC
i
. Patients with 
such diseases therefore are best ventilated with slower rates, larger V
t
, 
and longer expiratory time than inspiratory time. In diseases character
-
ized	by	decreased	compliance,	both	TC
e
	and	TC
i
 are short; however, 
the	TC
e
	is	closer	to	TC
i
 than in normal lungs because the stiffer alveoli 
recoil with greater force. Patients with these diseases are best ventilated 
with smaller V
t
 to prevent VILI, increased respiratory rate, and a rela
-
tively longer inspiratory time in each breath to improve oxygenation.
 
Critical Opening Pressure
Collapsed or atelectatic alveoli require a considerable amount of pres
-
sure to open. Once open, the alveoli require relatively less pressure 
for continued expansion. The process of opening atelectatic alveoli 
is called 
recruitment
. In a normal lung, alveoli remain open at end 
expiration, and therefore the lung requires relatively less pressure to 
receive its V
t
. In a disease process in which alveoli collapse at end expi
-
ration (e.g., PARDS), a substantial amount of pressure is required to 
open the alveoli during inspiration. This pressure causes VILI by two 
mechanisms: 
barotrauma
 at the terminal airway- alveolar junction and 
volutrauma
 as a result of overdistention of alveoli that are already open 
(see 
Figs. 86.2 and 86.3
). Although pulmonary parenchymal disease 
is rarely uniform and each of the millions of alveoli may have its own 
mechanical characteristics, a composite volume- pressure relationship 
could be conceptualized for the whole lung (
Fig. 86.7
).
30
20
Airway pressure (cm H
2
O)
10001
Seconds
22145
Time
3
Fig. 86.5
 Five different ways to increase mean airway pressure. 
(1)
 
Increase the respiratory flow rate, producing a square wave inspira
-
tory pattern; 
(2)
 increase the peak inspiratory pressure; 
(3)
 reverse the 
inspiratory- expiratory ratio or prolong the inspiratory time without 
changing the rate; 
(4)
 increase positive end- expiratory pressure; and 
(5)
 increase the ventilatory rate by reducing the expiratory time without 
changing the inspiratory time. 
(
From Harris TR, Wood BR. Physiologic 
principles. In Goldsmith JP, Karotkin EH, eds. 
Assisted Ventilation of the 
Neonate,
 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders;1996.
)
Fig. 86.6
 Time constant (TC). A certain amount of time 
is necessary for pressure equilibration (and therefore 
completion of delivery of gas) to occur between the prox
-
imal airway and alveoli. TC, a reflection of time required 
for pressure equilibration, is a product of compliance and 
resistance. In diseases of decreased lung compliance, 
less time is needed for pressure equilibration to occur, 
whereas in diseases of increased airway resistance, more 
time is required. Expiratory TC (TC
E
) is increased much 
more than inspiratory TC (TC
I
) in obstructive airway dis
-
eases because airway narrowing is exaggerated during 
expiration.
TC H11005 X secTC
E
 H11022 TC
INormal lung
pressureTC H11022 X secTC
E
 H11022H11022H11022 TC
IHigh resistance
pressureTC H11021 X secTC
I
 H11015 TC
ELow compliance
pressure
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86
 u 
Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure 
623
In these situations, the lower and upper portions of the curve are 
relatively horizontal and the middle portion is more vertical. At the 
beginning of inspiration, atelectatic alveoli are being recruited, requir
-
ing high pressure for a relatively small increase in volume. Once they 
are recruited, further increase in volume requires relatively less pres
-
sure. The pressure at which most alveoli are open is called 
critical open
-
ing pressure;
 this point is also referred to as the 
lower inflection point
 
(lower P
FLEX
). After the lower P
FLEX
, greater volume can be delivered 
for relatively less pressure until the upper P
FLEX
 is reached, at which 
point the volume- pressure curve again becomes relatively horizontal. 
The goal of mechanical ventilation in alveolar interstitial pathology is 
to deliver a V
t
 between the lower and upper inflection points, the so- 
called 
safe zone of ventilation.
 If V
t
 is delivered with a change in infla
-
tion pressure that includes the lower P
FLEX
, alveoli are likely to open 
and
 close during every breath, a process termed 
tidal recruitment
 
that is injurious to the lung (atelectrauma), especially at the terminal 
airway- alveolar junction. If V
t
 is delivered with a change of pressure 
that includes the upper P
FLEX
, overdistention of alveoli is likely to 
occur, resulting in volutrauma and barotrauma. Keeping tidal venti
-
lation between the upper and lower P
FLEX
 values is accomplished by 
maintaining a level of PEEP to produce baseline alveolar recruitment 
and delivering a relatively small V
t
. This lung- protective ventilation is 
also known as “open lung” strategy and is the preferred approach in 
diffuse alveolar interstitial diseases such as PARDS.
Mechanical ventilation may be delivered either noninvasively with a 
patient-	machine	interface	other	than	an	ETT	or	invasively	after	endo
-
tracheal intubation.
 
NONINVASIVE MECHANICAL VENTILATION
Delivering positive pressure mechanical respiratory support without 
the use of endotracheal intubation is called noninvasive positive pres
-
sure ventilation 
(NIPPV)
. This type of respiratory support has been 
increasingly used in the pediatric intensive care setting.
The most common techniques applied are continuous positive air
-
way pressure 
(CPAP)
 or biphasic (inspiratory and expiratory) posi
-
tive airway pressure 
(BiPAP)
. Of note, CPAP is only the delivery of 
a continuous airway pressure; therefore by definition, it is not a true 
form of noninvasive ventilation because a minute volume is gener
-
ated exclusively by the patient, not by the device. A variety of devices 
with increasing sophistication has been developed in recent years, and 
different interfaces are available, such as nasal prongs, nasal and full- 
face masks, and helmets. Especially in the pediatric population, an age- 
appropriate, properly sized, and comfortable interface that minimizes 
air leak is critical for the successful application of NIPPV. NIPPV has 
been successfully used in acute and chronic hypoxic and/or hypercarbic 
respiratory failure. Indications range from acute lower airway obstruc
-
tion, such as asthma, or acute upper airway obstruction, including 
postextubation airway swelling, to parenchymal lung diseases such as 
pneumonia and mild to moderate PARDS. Acute and chronic respira
-
tory failure from neuromuscular weakness or chest wall deformities 
have been the classic indication for its use. NIPPV can also be used to 
help prevent reintubation after prolonged mechanical ventilation.
BiPAP provides positive airway pressure during exhalation and 
additional positive pressure during inspiration. These pressures can 
be adjusted independently to suit individual needs and comfort, and a 
respiratory rate can be delivered. The additional positive pressure dur
-
ing inspiration helps improve alveolar ventilation in low compliance 
and obstructive lung disease. During exhalation, expiratory positive 
airway pressure can decrease the effects of airway closure by raising 
intraluminal pressure and ameliorating intrathoracic airway collapse. 
During inspiration, inspiratory positive airway pressure unloads inspi
-
ratory muscle work.
These mechanics may explain many of the physiologic benefits of 
NIPPV, including an increase in lung compliance and FRC, a decrease 
of dynamic airway narrowing, augmentation of V
t
 and alveolar venti
-
lation, and decreased work of breathing. Physiologic benefits of NIPPV 
in obstructive (e.g., asthma) and restrictive (e.g., PARDS) lung disease 
are schematically presented in 
Figures 86.8 and 86.9
. Additional ben
-
efits result from improving cardiopulmonary interactions, especially 
LV afterload reduction, thereby improving cardiac output in patients 
with acute or chronic LV dysfunction.
NIPPV is often well tolerated and may be associated with fewer 
complications compared to invasive mechanical ventilation; airway 
trauma from endotracheal intubation can be avoided, and less seda
-
tion is required. Breaks can be given for the administration of oral 
medications and clearance of respiratory secretions, and selected sta
-
ble patients can be fed by mouth. The rate of nosocomial infections, 
ventilator- associated pneumonia, and VILI is expected to decrease as 
well. In addition, aerosol therapy delivered by NIPPV appears to be 
more effective.
Complications of NIPPV include pressure injury, upper airway 
mucosal irritation, abdominal distention, aspiration, feeding intoler
-
ance, and pulmonary hyperinflation with resulting interstitial emphy
-
sema, pneumomediastinum, and pneumothorax. Patients initiated on 
NIPPV need close cardiorespiratory monitoring because the respira
-
tory failure may progress, leading to the need for endotracheal intu
-
bation. Patients with more severe respiratory distress and those who 
do not show improvement of respiratory indices (i.e., respiratory rate, 
SpO
2
/F
io
2
 ratio, reduction in F
io
2
) within 2 hours of initiation are 
more likely to require invasive ventilation. Patients with underlying 
severe systemic diseases such as sepsis, multiorgan dysfunction, and 
malignancies are less likely to respond favorably to NIPPV. Absolute 
contraindications include loss of airway reflexes, acute severe neuro
-
logic insults, cardiorespiratory arrest, and severe hemodynamic insta
-
bility. Patients with midface abnormalities or facial trauma and burns 
should not be considered candidates for NIPPV. Other contraindica
-
tions include the immediate postoperative period after facial and upper 
airway surgery, recent gastrointestinal surgery, or patients with bowel 
obstruction and vomiting. Patients who are severely agitated and con
-
fused should not be initiated on NIPPV. NIPPV has been shown to 
decrease intubation rates and reintubation rates after liberation from 
invasive mechanical ventilation, and has been increasingly used to treat 
acute or chronic respiratory failure in pediatric patients.
 
INVASIVE MECHANICAL VENTILATION
Mechanical ventilation involves considering the four phases of the 
respiratory cycle: (1) initiation of respiration and a variable that is con
-
trolled, often referred to as 
mode;
 (2) inspiratory phase characteristics, 
which determine the duration of inspiration and how the pressure or 
Critical opening pressure
Normal lungARDSPressureUpper inflection point (PFLEX)“Safe” zone of ventilationCritical opening pressureLower inflection point (PFLEX)
Fig. 86.7
 Volume- pressure relationship in normal lung and in acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). In ARDS, atelectatic alveoli re
-
quire a considerable amount of pressure to open. Critical opening pres
-
sure, also referred to as lower P
FLEX
, is the airway pressure above which 
further alveolar expansion occurs with relatively less pressure. Upper 
P
FLEX
 is the airway pressure above which further increase in pressure 
results in less alveolar expansion; this is the area of alveolar overdisten
-
tion. Keeping tidal volume between upper and lower P
FLEX
 values is 
considered less injurious to the lung.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

624 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
volume is delivered; (3) termination of inspiration, often referred to as 
cycle;
 and (4) expiratory phase characteristics. Ventilation should not 
completely take over the work of breathing unless indicated in spe
-
cific clinical conditions, such as in severe traumatic brain injury or 
pulmonary hypertensive crisis, but rather should assist the patient’s 
own respiratory effort, if present.
Initiation of Inspiration and the Control Variable 
(Mode)
The initiation of inspiration may be set to occur at a predetermined rate 
and interval regardless of patient effort, or it could be timed in response 
to patient effort. Once inspiration is initiated, the ventilator breath 
either is controlled entirely by the ventilator 
(control mode)
 or supports 
the patient’s inspiratory effort to a predetermined inspiratory volume 
or pressure target 
(support mode).
 Advances in technology allow for 
greater patient- ventilator synchrony to occur. The ventilator may be set 
to be 
triggered
 by the signal it receives as a result of patient effort. This 
feature may be in the form of lowering of either pressure 
(pressure trig
-
ger)
 or airflow 
(flow trigger)
 in the ventilator circuit generated by the 
patient’s inspiratory effort. If no such signal is received because of lack 
of patient effort, the ventilator delivers a breath at an interval selected 
by the operator. Most ventilators make use of flow triggering.
Control Modes
Intermittent Mandatory Ventilation Mode
. 
In intermittent man
-
datory ventilation 
(IMV)
, inspiration is initiated at a set frequency 
with a timing mechanism independent of patient effort. In between 
machine- delivered breaths, the patient can breathe spontaneously 
from a fresh source of gas. IMV allows for adjustment of ventilator 
support according to the patient’s needs, making it useful in the wean
-
ing process. Lack of synchrony between machine- delivered breaths 
and patient efforts may result in ineffective ventilation and patient 
discomfort, especially when IMV is delivered at a high rate. In such 
cases the patient may require sedation and pharmacologic neuromus
-
cular blockade for efficient delivery of V
t
.	To	obviate	this	problem,	
 
synchronized IMV (SIMV)
 is preferred, whereby the machine- 
delivered breaths are triggered by the patient’s inspiratory efforts (
Fig. 
86.10
). In between the machine- delivered breaths, a fresh source of gas 
is available for spontaneous patient breaths. In the absence of patient 
effort, the patient receives a predetermined backup rate. Even with 
SIMV, ventilator- patient asynchrony can occur because V
t
, inflation 
pressure, and inspiratory time are determined by the ventilator alone.
 
Assist- Control Mode
. 
In assist- control (AC) mode, every patient 
breath is triggered by pressure or flow generated by patient inspira
-
tory effort and “assisted” with either preselected inspiratory pressure 
or volume. The rate of delivered breaths is therefore determined by the 
patient’s inherent respiratory rate. A backup total (patient and ventila
-
tor) obligatory rate is set to deliver a minimum number of breaths. For 
illustration, on AC mode with a backup rate of 20 breaths/min and a 
patient’s inherent rate of 15 breaths/min, the ventilator will assist all the 
patient’s breaths and the patient will receive 5 additional breaths/min. 
On the other hand, a patient with an inherent rate of 25 breaths/min 
will receive all 25 breaths assisted. Although useful in some patients, 
the AC mode cannot be used in the weaning process, which involves 
gradual decrease in ventilator support.
 
Control Variable
Once initiated, either the V
t
 or the pressure delivered by the machine 
can be controlled. The machine- delivered breath is thus referred to as 
either volume controlled or pressure controlled (
Table	86.12
). With 
volume- controlled ventilation (VCV)
, machine- delivered volume is 
the primary control, and the inflation pressure generated depends on 
the respiratory system’s compliance and resistance. Changes in respi
-
ratory system compliance and resistance are therefore easily detected 
from changes observed in inflation pressure. In 
pressure- controlled 
ventilation (PCV)
, the pressure change above the baseline is the pri
-
mary control, and the V
t
 delivered to the lungs depends on the respi
-
ratory system’s C and R. Changes in respiratory system C and R do 
not affect inflation pressure and may therefore go undetected unless 
the exhaled V
t
 is closely monitored. VCV and PCV have their own 
advantages and disadvantages (see 
Table	86.12
). Favoring one mode 
over the other is largely driven by institutional preference and per
-
sonal beliefs. VCV is characterized by a constant inspiratory flow with 
+40
+30+20+100Intrapleural Pressure (Cm H2O)= resistive inspiratory WOB with IPAP= spontaneous resistive inspiratory WOBSpontaneousSpontaneousStatic P-V relationshipEPAPABIPAPTidal Volume (ml)
= spontaneous resistive expiratory WOB
+
+
= resistive expiratory WOB with EPAP10203
040
Fig. 86.8
 Work of breathing (WOB) in status asthmaticus with and 
without noninvasive positive pressure ventilation. In the expiratory limb 
of the respiratory cycle, the equal pressure point is displaced distally, 
causing airways to begin to close at a higher lung volume (increased 
closing capacity), leading to dynamic hyperinflation, and auto–positive 
end- expiratory pressure (auto- PEEP). 
(A),
 Application of expiratory posi
-
tive airway pressure (EPAP) stents the airways, reducing intrathoracic 
airway collapse, dynamic hyperinflation, auto- PEEP 
(B),
 and WOB. In 
the inspiratory limb, the patient needs to generate less negative pres
-
sure to initiate inspiration because of lower auto- PEEP. Inspiratory mus
-
cles are further unloaded by inspiratory positive airway pressure (IPAP) 
throughout inspiration for the given tidal volume. Both expiratory and 
inspiratory WOB are thus reduced by application of noninvasive posi
-
tive pressure ventilation. P- V, Pressure- volume. 
(
From Sarnaik AA, Sar
-
naik AP. Noninvasive ventilation in pediatric status asthmaticus: Sound 
physiologic rationale but is it really safe, effective, and cost- efficient? 
Pediatr Crit Care Med.
 2012;13:484- 485.
)
Total WOB = WOB/Breath Cycle X Respiratory Rate
Tidal VolumeTidal VolumeSpontaneous BreathBreath on NIPPV100−10−20−30−40100−10−20−30
−40
Intrapleural Pressure (Cm H2O)Intrapleural Pressure (Cm H2O)Expiratory work associated with grunting
Inspiratory work
Fig. 86.9
 Beneficial physiologic pulmonary effects of noninvasive pos
-
itive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) in restrictive lung disease (e.g., ARDS). 
Left,
 Without NIPPV, the slope of pressure- volume relationship is flatter, 
resulting in lower tidal volume for a given inflation pressure and neces
-
sitating an increased respiratory rate to maintain required minute alveo
-
lar ventilation. Start of inspiration is at a lower lung volume, indicating 
decreased functional residual capacity (FRC). Expiration is active toward 
the end as a result of grunting aimed at increasing FRC. 
Right,
 On in
-
stitution of NIPPV, the slope of the pressure- volume relationship is in
-
creased, resulting in greater tidal volume for a given inflation pressure, 
with a subsequent decrease in respiratory rate and inspiratory work of 
breathing (WOB). FRC is increased because of expiratory positive air
-
way pressure (EPAP), resulting in improved oxygenation and decreased 
expiratory work associated with grunting.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86
 u 
Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure 
625
a constant, preset V
t
, whereas PCV makes use of a decelerative flow 
pattern, with a variable delivered V
t
. A potential benefit of PCV is that 
the inspiratory pressures are limited, making it a more attractive mode 
in disease conditions where there is airway obstruction, preventing the 
normally compliant alveolus from being exposed to large V
t
. Generally 
speaking, PCV is more efficient than VCV in terms of amount of V
t
 
delivered for a given inflation pressure during ventilation of a lung that 
has	nonuniform	TC,	as	in	asthma.	In	VCV,	relatively	less-	obstructed	
airways are likely to receive more of the machine- delivered volume 
throughout inspiration than relatively more obstructed airways with 
longer	TC	(
Fig. 86.11A
). This situation would result in uneven ventila
-
tion, higher peak inspiratory pressure (PIP), and a decrease in C
DYN
. In 
PCV, because of a constant inflation pressure that is held throughout 
inspiration,	relatively	less	obstructed	lung	units	with	shorter	TC	would	
achieve pressure equilibration earlier during inspiration than the rela
-
tively	more	obstructed	areas.	Thus	units	with	shorter	TCs	would	attain	
their	final	volume	earlier	in	inspiration,	and	those	with	longer	TCs	
would continue to receive additional volume later in inspiration (see 
Fig. 86.11B
). This situation would result in more uniform distribution 
of inspired gas, delivery of more V
t
 for the same inflation pressure, and 
improved C
DYN
 compared with VCV.
Pressure- regulated volume control (PRVC)
 combines the char
-
acteristics of VCV and PCV. In this mode, V
t
	and	T
i
 are controlled 
as primary variables, but the ventilator determines the lowest amount 
of pressure needed to deliver the desired V
t
. Inflation pressure is thus 
continuously adjusted to deliver the prescribed V
t
	over	the	T
i
, depend
-
ing on the patient’s respiratory C and R.
 
 
Pressure- support ventilation (PSV)
 and 
volume- support ventilation 
(VSV)
 are designed to support the patient’s spontaneous respirations. 
With PSV, initiation of inspiration is triggered by the patient’s sponta
-
neous breath, which is then “supported” by a rapid rise in ventilator 
pressure to a preselected level. The inspiration is continued until the 
inspiratory flow rate falls to a set level (generally 25% of peak flow rate) 
as the patient’s lungs inflate. Each inspiration is initiated and termi
-
nated	by	the	patient,	thus	T
i
 is controlled by the patient’s own efforts. 
PSV has no backup rate, so a ventilator breath will not be delivered 
to the apneic patient. PSV can be combined with SIMV so that any 
breath above the SIMV rate is supported by PSV. Allowing the patient 
to control as much of the rate, V
t
, and inspiratory time as possible is 
considered to be a more comfortable form of mechanical ventilation 
than those in which the V
t
	(or	inflation	pressure)	and	T
i
 are preset. 
PSV as the sole source of mechanical ventilator support is often inad
-
equate for patients with severe lung disease and those with a depressed 
respiratory drive, but may be especially useful in patients being weaned 
and in those who require mechanical ventilation for relatively minor 
lung disease or for neuromuscular weakness.
VSV is similar to PSV, in that all the spontaneous breaths are supported. 
In VSV, inspiratory pressure to support spontaneous breaths is adjusted to 
guarantee a preset V
t
 goal. If there is a change in respiratory mechanics or 
patient effort, the inspiratory pressure to support the breath initiated by 
patient effort is automatically adjusted to achieve the set V
t
.
 
Inspiratory Phase Characteristics
Inspiratory	flow	waveform,	T
i
, and pressure rise time can be adjusted 
in the inspiratory phase to suit the patient’s respiratory mechanics.
In	PCV	the	duration	of	T
i
	is	directly	set	in	seconds.	In	VCV	the	T
i
 can be 
adjusted by adjusting the inspiratory flow (volume/time) and/or setting an 
inspiratory pause before exhalation starts. Irrespective of ventilator mode, 
the	choice	of	T
i
 value depends on the respiratory rate, which determines 
the total duration of each breath, and on the estimation of inspiratory and 
expiratory	TCs.	Decreasing	the	flow	rate	delivery	increases	T
i
, and vice 
versa.	With	an	increase	in	T
i
, the pulmonary capillary blood is exposed to 
a higher level of P
ao
2
 for a longer time. This feature is beneficial in diseases 
with decreased EELV, such as PARDS and pulmonary edema. An increase 
Airway pressure (cm H
2
O)
50SpontaneousinhalationSpontaneousinspiratory
effort
Time (sec)Exhalation
AB
Timing“window”:Time when cycling mechanismis activated.
Fig. 86.10
 Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation. At set 
intervals, the ventilator’s timing circuit becomes activated and a timing 
“window” appears 
(dashed line area)
. If the patient initiates a breath 
in the timing window, the ventilator delivers a mandatory breath 
(A)
. 
If no spontaneous effort occurs, the ventilator delivers a mandatory 
breath at a fixed time after the timing window 
(B)
. 
(
From Banner MJ, 
Gallagher TJ. Respiratory failure in the adult: Ventilatory support. In: 
Kirby RR, Smith RA, Desautels DA, eds. 
Mechanical Ventilation.
 New 
York: Churchill Livingstone;1985.
)
Table 86.12 
 
  Characteristics of Pressure- Controlled and Volume- Controlled Methods of Ventilation
PRESSURE- CONTROLLED VENTILATION
VOLUME- CONTROLLED VENTILATION
Control setting(s)
Inflation pressure
Inspiratory time
Rise time
Tidal volume
Flow rate
Inspiratory flow pattern (constant vs decelerating)
Machine- delivered volume
Depends on respiratory system compliance and 
resistance
Constant
Inflation pressure
Constant
Depends on respiratory system compliance and resistance
Endotracheal tube leak
Somewhat compensated
Leaked volume part of tidal volume
Distribution of ventilation
More uniform in lungs with varying time 
constant units
Less uniform in lungs with varying time constant units
Patient comfort
Possibly compromised
Possibly enhanced
Weaning
Inflation pressure adjustment required to deliver 
desired tidal volume
Tidal volume remains constant; inflation pressure automatically 
weaned
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

626 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
in	T
i
 also increases V
t
 without increasing inflation pressure in PCV if 
inspiratory flow is still occurring at end expiration. It must be recognized 
that	at	a	given	ventilator	rate,	an	increase	in	T
i
 decreases expiratory time 
(T
e
). Therefore any strategy that employs an increase in the inspiratory 
component	of	the	respiratory	cycle	should	ensure	that	the	decreased	T
e
 is 
still sufficient for complete exhalation.
Inspiratory flow waveform
 can be adjusted in VCV mode as either 
a constant flow (square waveform) or a decelerating flow (descend
-
ing ramp waveform). With a square waveform, flow is held constant 
throughout inspiration. In a descending ramp waveform, flow is maxi
-
mal at the start of inspiration and declines throughout its duration. It is 
debatable which flow pattern is better for a given disease.
In PCV and PSV, the prescribed PIP is reached through delivery of 
airflow. 
Pressure rise time
 reflects the time required for the ventilator 
to reach PIP and can be adjusted by control of flow at the beginning of 
the inspiratory phase. The inspiratory flow rise time may be adjusted to 
prevent too rapid a rise in inspiratory pressure, which can be uncom
-
fortable for a patient who is awake and lead to dyssynchrony.
 
Termination of Inspiration (Cycle)
The two most commonly used inspiratory terminating mechanisms in 
control modes are time- cycled and volume- cycled. With a 
time- cycled
 
mechanical	breath,	inspiration	is	terminated	after	a	preselected	T
i
 has 
elapsed, whereas with 
volume- cycled
 breath, the inspiration ends after 
a preselected volume has been delivered by the machine into the ven
-
tilator circuit. A time- cycled breath is almost always pressure- limited, 
with the PIP held constant for the duration of inspiration. A volume- 
cycled breath can be pressure- limited as a safety mechanism to avoid 
barotrauma. The inspiration- terminating mechanism is set somewhat 
differently in support modes. In PSV the inspiration is set to end after 
the inspiratory flow decreases below a certain percentage (usually 25%) 
of peak inspiratory flow. This happens when the patient no longer desires 
to receive additional V
t
. Such a breath is termed 
flow- cycled
. In VSV the 
inspiration is terminated when the patient has received the selected V
t
.
 
Expiratory Phase Maneuvers
The most useful expiratory phase maneuver is the application of PEEP, 
which is applied to both the control breath and the assisted breath. The 
most important clinical benefits of PEEP are to stabilize recruited alveoli 
to increase EELV in patients with alveolar- interstitial diseases and thereby 
improve oxygenation. Any situation where there is zero end- expiratory 
pressure (ZEEP), as is the case when the patient is disconnected from the 
ventilator circuit (even if briefly), will result in alveolar 
derecruitment
 
and decline in oxygenation. In patients with obstructive lesions in which 
insufficient exhalation results in air trapping and auto- PEEP, extrinsic 
PEEP (applied through a mechanical device) can prevent airway clo
-
sure during expiration and improve ventilation. Other salutary effects of 
PEEP include redistribution of extravascular lung water away from gas- 
exchanging areas, improved 
˙V/˙Q
 relationship, stabilization of the chest 
wall, and reduction in work of breathing in patients with intrinsic PEEP. 
The effect of PEEP on lung C is variable, depending on the level of PEEP 
provided and the patient’s pulmonary mechanics. By shifting tidal venti
-
lation to a more favorable part of the pressure- volume curve, PEEP may 
maintain more recruited alveoli, delay airway closure, and improve lung 
C. Excessive PEEP, on the other hand, may lead to overdistention of alveoli 
and reduced C. The effect of PEEP in individual patients can be ascertained 
by measuring exhaled V
t
 and calculating C
DYN
. Other potentially deleteri
-
ous effects of PEEP include decreased venous return, increased pulmonary 
vascular resistance, and decreased cardiac output.
 
ADDITIONAL VENTILATORY MODALITIES
Airway Pressure Release Ventilation
Airway pressure release ventilation (
APRV
) aims to improve oxygenation 
in patients with preserved respiratory drive suffering from severe hypox
-
emic respiratory failure due to alveolar- interstitial disease. This modal
-
ity applies a CPAP, designated CPAP
HIGH
, to recruit and maintain EELV 
with brief intermittent release phases of CPAP
LOW
 to allow alveolar gas 
to escape. CPAP
HIGH
 is analogous to PIP, and CPAP
LOW
 is similar to set
-
ting PEEP. In contrast to the patient receiving conventional mechanical 
ventilation, a patient receiving APRV spends the majority of time in the 
CPAP
HIGH
 phase, which may last as long as 3- 5 seconds with a brief (0.3- 
0.5 seconds) time in the CPAP
LOW
	phase.	These	atypically	long	T
i
s are tol
-
erated because of a floating expiratory valve in the ventilator circuit that 
permits spontaneous breathing during CPAP
HIGH
 phase. Therefore even 
if the CPAP
HIGH
 phase can be considered “inspiratory” and the CPAP
LOW
 
phase “expiratory” in regard to the ventilator, the patient is able to breathe 
spontaneously	during	both	these	phases.	The	longer	ventilator	T
i
 recruits 
lung units, and the ability to breathe spontaneously during this phase 
allows distribution of gas flow to atelectatic lung regions. The outcome 
benefit of APRV in pediatric hypoxemic respiratory failure has not been 
proven.
 
High- Frequency Ventilation
Mechanical ventilation at supraphysiologic rates and low V
t
, known as 
high- frequency ventilation 
(HFV)
, improves gas exchange in a select 
group of patients who show no response to more traditional ventilatory 
modalities. The mechanism of alveolar ventilation in HFV is very differ
-
ent from that in conventional ventilation, in that HFV is less dependent 
Fig. 86.11
 
A,
 In volume- controlled ventilation (VCV), tidal volume (V
t
) is delivered to the less obstructed areas throughout inspiration. Obstructed 
areas of the lung therefore receive a lower proportion of V
t
, resulting in uneven ventilation. 
B,
 In pressure- controlled ventilation (PCV), less obstruct
-
ed areas equilibrate with inflation pressure and therefore receive most of their V
t
 early during inspiration. More obstructed areas, with prolonged 
time constants, require longer time for pressure equilibration and therefore continue to receive a portion of their V
t
 later during inspiration. The 
entire V
t
 is more evenly distributed than with volume- cycled ventilation.
Volume control ventilationPressure control ventilationAreas with lowresistance
are preferentially fille
d
throughout inspiration(both early and late)
resulting in uneven
ventilation especially
in obstructive lesion
s
AB
Early inspiration: Areas with short time constants fill
up quickly and equilibriate with proximal airway pressure.
Late inspiration: Areas with prolonged time constantsreceive more volume with slower equilibrium of pressure.Result: More even gas distribution compared to volume-controlled ventilation especially in obstructive lesionsEarly phasePressure equilibrationMax volume reachedLate phase
PPPP
Pressure & volumeequilibration still occurring
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86
 u 
Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure 
627
on V
t
 and more dependent on asymmetric velocities and convective 
dispersion of inspired gas. Patients with severe persistent hypoxic failure 
are most likely to benefit from HFV. HFV is also helpful in patients with 
bronchopleural fistula and persistent air leaks. The main tenet of HFV is to 
recruit lung volume with a high mean airway pressure (MAP) and produce 
smaller fluctuations in alveolar pressure during inspiration and expiration, 
thus maintaining a satisfactory EELV and reducing alveolar stretch. The 
two most investigated techniques of HFV are HFOV and HFJV.
The most commonly used HFV modality is 
high- frequency oscillatory 
ventilation (HFOV)
, which employs a mechanism to generate to- and- fro 
air movement. Additional air is drawn in (entrained) through a parallel 
circuit via a Venturi effect. Air is pushed in during inspiration and actively 
pulled out during expiration. The main determinants of oxygenation are 
F
io
2
 and MAP, whereas ventilation is determined by changes in pressure 
(amplitude) around the MAP and frequency. The optimal frequency varies 
for the individual patient and disease process and depends on the so- called 
corner frequency,
 where the pressure cost of ventilation is the lowest. In 
PARDS this usually means frequency >8 Hz, irrespective of age.
In 
high- frequency jet ventilation (HFJV)
, a high- frequency inter
-
rupter is interposed between a high- pressure gas source and a small 
cannula	that	is	incorporated	in	the	ETT.	The	cannula	propels	tiny	
amounts of gas (jets) at high velocity and high frequency through the 
ETT.	An	additional	amount	of	gas	is	entrained	from	a	parallel	circuit.	
Unlike in HFOV, expiration occurs passively in HFJV as a result of elas
-
tic recoil of the lung and the chest wall. PEEP is set through the parallel 
circuit by a conventional ventilator in- line. Respiratory rate is generally 
set at 420 breaths/min. Major determinants of oxygenation are F
io
2
 
and PEEP, and the major determinant of ventilation is PIP.
 
CONVENTIONAL VENTILATOR SETTINGS
Fraction of Inspired Oxygen
The shape of the hemoglobin- O
2
 dissociation curve dictates that oxygen 
content in the blood is not linearly related to Pa
o
2
. A Pa
o
2
 value that 
results in an oxyhemoglobin saturation of 
≤
97% is reasonable in most 
situations, because a higher Pa
o
2
 would cause minimal increase in arte
-
rial oxygen content, and a modest (10 mm Hg) drop in Pa
o
2
 would result 
in minimal decrease in oxyhemoglobin saturation. In most cases, a Pa
o
2
 
value of >60 mm Hg is a reasonable goal. F
io
2
 values that are higher than 
those necessary to attain oxyhemoglobin saturations of approximately 
95% expose the patient to unnecessary oxygen toxicity. Whenever pos
-
sible, F
io
2
 values should be decreased to a level 
≤
0.40 as long as oxyhe
-
moglobin saturation remains 
≥
92%. In patients with severe lung disease, 
oxyhemoglobin saturation of 88–92% may be acceptable.
 
Mode
The choice of mode of ventilation depends on the disease entity that is 
being treated and how much ventilator- patient interaction is desired. 
SIMV or AC is chosen as the control mode; PCV, VCV, or PRVC as 
the variable that is to be controlled; and pressure support and volume 
support are the choices for support modes. SIMV pressure- controlled 
modes are most commonly used in children.
 
Tidal Volume and Rate
As previously discussed, alveolar ventilation, the chief determinant of 
Pa
co
2
, is calculated using V
t
, respiratory rate, and V
d
. A change in V
t
 
results in a corresponding change in alveolar ventilation without affecting 
V
d
- ventilation. A change in respiratory rate will affect alveolar ventilation 
and the V
d
- ventilation. Choice of V
t
	and	rate	depends	on	the	TC.	In	a	
patient with relatively normal lung compliance, an age- appropriate ventila
-
tor rate and a V
t
 of 5- 8 mL/kg would be appropriate initial settings. Diseases 
associated	with	decreased	TC	(decreased	static	compliance;	e.g.,	PARDS,	
pneumonia, pulmonary edema) are best treated with small (4- 6 mL/kg) 
V
t
 and relatively rapid rates (e.g., 25- 40 breaths/min). Diseases associated 
with	prolonged	TCs	(increased	airway	resistance;	e.g.,	asthma,	bronchiol
-
itis) are best treated with relatively slow rates and higher (10- 12 mL/kg) V
t
. 
In PCV the delivered V
t
 depends on the C and R of the patient’s respiratory 
system and needs to be monitored to ensure the appropriate amount for a 
given situation. The operator titrates the inflation pressure, depending on 
the volume of exhaled V
t
. It should be emphasized that achieving a 
nor
-
mal
 Pa
co
2
 value is not a goal of mechanical ventilation. Some degree of 
hypercapnia (permissive hypercapnia) should be accepted, especially when 
one is attempting to limit injurious inflation pressures or V
t
.
 
Inspiratory Time and Expiratory Time
T
i
	and	T
e
 are adjusted by setting inspiratory flow rate and/or inspira
-
tory	pause	in	VCV	and	by	setting	the	precise	T
i
 in PCV. Increasing the 
T
i
 results in increased MAP, improved oxygenation in diseases with 
decreased EELV, and potentially a better distribution of V
t
 in obstruc
-
tive lung disease. Sufficient expiratory time must be provided to ensure 
adequate emptying of the alveoli.
 
Positive End- Expiratory Pressure
The best level of PEEP depends on the disease entity that is being treated, 
and it may change in the same patient from time to time. Decisions are 
often based on the Pa
o
2
/F
io
2
 ratio and the measurement of C
DYN
. For 
patients with PARDS, the adult- based PEEP/F
io
2
 grid may be useful.
 
PATIENT- VENTILATOR ASYNCHRONY
Patient- ventilator asynchrony occurs when the patient’s respiratory 
pattern does not match that of the ventilator. This can occur during all 
phases of respiration. Adverse effects of patient- ventilator asynchrony 
include wasted effort, ineffective delivery of desired V
t
, excessive gen
-
eration of intrathoracic pressure resulting in injury and adverse effects 
on cardiac output, increased work of breathing, and patient discom
-
fort. Although several mechanisms exist to facilitate patient- ventilator 
synchrony, a certain amount of asynchrony is inevitable unless the 
patient is pharmacologically sedated and paralyzed.
Triggering the Ventilator
The patient must be able to trigger the ventilator without excessive effort. 
Ventilators can be pressure- triggered or flow- triggered. With 
pressure 
triggering
, the inspiratory valve opens and flow is delivered when a set 
negative pressure is generated within the patient- ventilator circuit dur
-
ing inspiration. The amount of pressure required to trigger an inspiration 
depends on the pressure trigger sensitivity. In 
flow triggering
, the ventila
-
tor provides a base flow of gas through the ventilator- patient circuit. When 
a flow sensor on the expiratory limb of the patient- ventilator circuit detects 
a decrease in flow as a result of the patient’s inspiratory effort, the inspira
-
tory valve opens and a ventilator breath is delivered. The degree of change 
in flow required to trigger an inspiration depends on the flow trigger sen
-
sitivity. Flow triggering is considered to be more comfortable, primarily 
because the patient receives some flow before triggering the ventilator, in 
contrast to pressure triggering, in which no flow is provided until the ven
-
tilator breath is triggered through generation of negative pressure. Increas
-
ing the trigger sensitivity by decreasing the change in either pressure or 
flow needed to trigger an inspiration decreases the work of breathing and 
may improve comfort. However, reducing the required pressure or flow 
excessively could result in accidental triggering and unwanted breaths by 
turbulence, caused by condensation in the ventilator circuit, endotracheal 
tube	(ETT)	air	leaks,	or	cardiac	oscillations.
 
Selection of Appropriate Inspiratory Time
The	duration	of	T
i
	should	match	the	patient’s	own	inspiratory	phase.	If	T
i
 
is too long, the patient’s drive to exhale may begin before the ventilator 
breath has cycled off. When this occurs, exhalation occurs against inspi
-
ratory flow and a closed exhalation valve, resulting in increased work of 
breathing,	excessive	rise	in	intrathoracic	pressure,	and	discomfort.	If	T
i
 is 
too short, the patient may be still inhaling without respirator support. In 
general	terms,	T
i
 is usually initiated at 0.5- 0.7 second for neonates, 0.8- 1 
second in older children, and 1- 1.2 second for adolescents and adults, 
but	should	really	be	driven	by	the	inspiratory	TC.	Adjustments	need	to	
be made through individual patient observations and according to the 
type of lung disease present. In patients with severe lung disease (both 
obstructive	and	restrictive),	unnatural	T
i
	and	T
e
 values may have to be 
selected, as discussed earlier. In such situations, adequate analgesia, seda
-
tion, and, in extreme cases, neuromuscular blockade may be needed.
 
Selection of Inspiratory Flow Pattern
In VCV, inappropriate flow may be another source of patient- ventilator 
dyssynchrony. After initiation of inspiration, if the set amount of flow is 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

628 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
inadequate to meet patient demand, a state of 
flow starvation
 occurs, 
resulting in excessive work of breathing and discomfort. Such patients may 
require a decelerating inspiratory flow pattern, in which a higher flow is 
provided in the beginning of inspiration and less toward the end as the 
lungs fill up. On the other hand, such a pattern may be uncomfortable for a 
patient who desires more gradual alveolar filling. The selection of inspira
-
tory flow pattern should be based on the individual patient’s respiratory 
mechanics. In PCV and PSV, the inspiratory rise time determines the 
manner in which the airway pressure is raised and V
t
 delivered. Consider
-
ations for choosing the appropriate rise time in PCV and PSV are similar 
to those for choosing the inspiratory flow pattern in VCV.
 
Use of Support Modes
A conscious patient should be allowed to have spontaneous breaths 
that are supported by either PSV or VSV. This approach minimizes 
the mandatory breaths generated by the ventilator that are beyond the 
patient’s control to modulate. Therefore continued assessments should 
be made to determine whether the patient is able to maintain ventila
-
tory requirements more in support modes and less in control modes.
 
Use of Sedation and Neuromuscular Blockade
Having a conscious yet comfortable patient is a desirable goal during 
mechanical ventilation. Spontaneous breaths with good muscle tone and 
presence of cough are important for adequate clearance of tracheobron
-
chial secretions. The patient’s ability to indicate distress is also important in 
identifying and preventing potential injurious factors. In certain situations, 
management of patient- ventilator asynchrony assumes much greater 
importance when the asynchrony is causing unacceptable derangement 
of gas exchange and VILI. Both alveolar interstitial lung pathology and 
obstructive airway diseases may necessitate unnatural and uncomfortable 
settings	for	respiratory	rate,	T
i
, and inflation pressures. In such patients, 
deep sedation is often necessary; dexmedetomidine, benzodiazepines, and 
opiates are the agents most commonly used for this purpose. In extreme 
situations, pharmacologic neuromuscular blockade is required to abolish 
any patient effort and respiratory muscle tone. When such pharmacologic 
paralysis is used, deep sedation must be ensured so that the patient does 
not sense pain and discomfort. Pharmacologic sedation and paralysis 
can ensure total control of the patient’s ventilation by mechanical means 
and may result in lifesaving improvement in gas exchange with reduc
-
tion in inflation pressures. However, long- term use of such agents may 
be associated with undesirable consequences and higher morbidity. The 
risk of inadequate clearance of tracheobronchial secretions and atelectasis 
is potentially greater. Long- term use of pharmacologic sedation may be 
associated with chemical dependency and withdrawal manifestations, and 
prolonged neuromuscular blockade is associated with neuromyopathy in 
critically ill patients. The benefits of sedation and pharmacologic paralysis 
therefore should be carefully balanced with the risks, and periodic assess
-
ments should be made to determine the need for their continuation.
 
Cardiopulmonary Interactions
Mechanical ventilation can have salutary and adverse effects on car
-
diac performance. By decreasing oxygen consumption necessary for 
work of breathing, oxygen supply to vital organs is improved. Positive 
pressure breathing decreases LV afterload, thus enhancing stroke vol
-
ume and cardiac output in patients with a failing myocardium (e.g., 
myocarditis). On the other hand, the decreased systemic venous return 
may further compromise stroke volume in hypovolemic (preload- 
dependent) patients. Such patients will require intravascular fluid load
-
ing when subjected to positive pressure ventilation. Also, an increase in 
pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) caused by positive intrathoracic 
pressure may result in further decompensation of a poorly performing 
right ventricle. PVR is at its lowest value at an optimum FRC. When 
FRC is too low or too high, PVR (and therefore the right ventricular 
afterload) is increased. Both desirable and undesirable effects of cardio
-
pulmonary interactions may coexist and require ongoing assessment 
and necessary interventions (
Table	86.13
).
 
MONITORING RESPIRATORY MECHANICS
Exhaled Tidal Volume
Exhaled tidal volume (V
te
) is measured by a pneumotachometer in the 
ventilator circuit during exhalation; in small children, it is preferably 
measured	near	the	connection	of	the	ETT.	Measurement	of	V
te
 more 
accurately describes the V
t
 that is contributing to the patient’s alveolar 
ventilation. In PCV the V
te
 depends on the patient’s respiratory system 
compliance and resistance and therefore offers valuable diagnostic clues. A 
decrease in V
te
 during PCV is indicative of either decrease in compliance 
or increase in resistance and is helpful in directing the clinician to appro
-
priate investigation and management. An increase in V
te
 is indicative of 
improvement and may require weaning of inflation pressures to adjust the 
V
te
.
 
Peak Inspiratory Pressure
In VCV and PRVC, the PIP is the secondary variable determined by the 
patient’s respiratory system compliance and resistance. An increase in PIP 
in these modes is indicative of decreased C (e.g., atelectasis, pulmonary 
edema, pneumothorax) or increased R (e.g., bronchospasm, obstructed 
ETT).	During	VCV	and	PRVC,	decreasing	the	respiratory	rate	or	prolong
-
ing	the	T
i
	will	result	in	a	lower	PIP	in	patients	with	prolonged	TCs	because	
more time will be available for alveoli to fill. In such patients, a decrease 
in PIP (or plateau pressure when an inspiratory pause is set during VCV) 
suggests increased C or decreased R of the respiratory system.
 
Respiratory System Dynamic Compliance and Static 
Compliance
The changes in PIP (or plateau pressure) during VCV and PRVC, and 
in V
te
 during PCV, are determined by C
DYN
 of the respiratory system 
(lung and chest wall). C
DYN
 is calculated as follows
CDYN=VTE÷(PIP‐PEEP)
C
DYN
 takes into account both the flow- resistive and the elastic prop
-
erties of the respiratory system. Changes in C
DYN
 can be used to assess 
effects of different levels of PEEP as tidal ventilation is shifted along the 
slope of the volume- pressure curve (see 
Fig. 86.7
). An increase in PEEP in 
alveolar- interstitial diseases (increased elastance), resulting in an increase 
in C
DYN
, suggests alveolar recruitment, whereas a decrease in C
DYN
 may 
indicate overdistention. Similarly, in obstructive diseases (increased R), 
adjustment in PEEP levels to ameliorate airway collapse during exhala
-
tion can be guided by monitoring C
DYN
.	To	assess	only	the	elastic	recoil	
of the lung, measurement of C
STAT
 when there is no airflow is required. 
This measurement is performed by using an inspiratory hold maneuver 
with the patient under neuromuscular blockade and observing pressure- 
time and flow- time waveforms (
Fig. 86.12
). During this maneuver, inspi
-
ratory flow ceases while the expiratory valve continues to remain closed, 
thus allowing pressure to equilibrate throughout the ventilator circuit and 
the patient’s lungs. This pressure, referred to as the 
plateau pressure
 (P
plat
), 
reflects alveolar pressure. C
STAT
 is calculated as follows:
C
stat
 = V
te
 
÷
 (P
plat
 
−
 PEEP)
The difference between C
DYN
 and C
STAT
 is attributable to airway 
resistance. This difference is minimal in alveolar- interstitial diseases 
but substantial in airway obstruction.
 
Assessment of Auto- PEEP
Auto- PEEP is assessed with the use of an expiratory pause maneu
-
ver in which inspiration is delayed and alveolar pressure is allowed to 
Table 86.13 
 
  Suggested Mechanical Ventilation Strategies 
in Various Clinical Situations
SITUATION
DISEASE
STRATEGY
Low compliance, normal 
resistance
ARDS
PCV, APRV, HFOV
Normal compliance, high 
resistance
Asthma
PCV, PRVC
Normal compliance, 
normal resistance, for 
weaning
Head trauma, 
 
drug overdose, 
subglottic stenosis
VCV
APRV, Airway pressure release ventilation; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; 
HFOV, high-frequency oscillatory ventilation; PCV, pressure- controlled ventilation; 
PRVC, pressure- regulated volume control; VCV, volume- controlled ventilation.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 86
 u 
Acute Care of Respiratory Distress and Failure 
629
equilibrate with the airway. In diseases with airway obstruction, insuf
-
ficient alveolar emptying may occur if exhalation time is not adequate. 
The alveolar pressure in excess of the set PEEP at the completion of the 
expiratory pause is measured as auto- PEEP or intrinsic PEEP. Auto- 
PEEP can have adverse effects on ventilation and hemodynamic status. 
It	can	be	managed	by	decreasing	the	respiratory	rate	or	T
i
 and thus 
allowing longer time for exhalation. Auto- PEEP may also be managed 
by increasing the set PEEP (
extrinsic
 PEEP), thereby delaying airway 
closure during exhalation and improving alveolar emptying.
 
Assessment of Dead Space Ventilation
Positive pressure ventilation and application of PEEP may result in a 
decrease in venous return, cardiac output, and therefore pulmonary per
-
fusion. Ventilation of poorly perfused alveoli results in dead space ven
-
tilation, which does not contribute to gas exchange. The V
d
/V
t
 fraction 
can be calculated (see 
Chapter 86
). Normal V
d
/V
t
 is 0.33. Increased V
d
/
V
t
 is indicative of poorly perfused alveoli. Patients with increased V
d
/V
t
 
may require intravascular volume infusion or other means of augmenting 
the cardiac output to improve pulmonary perfusion. The V
d
/V
t
 fraction 
is calculated and displayed by commercially available capnographs, which 
measure endotracheal Pet
co
2
 continuously.
 
VENTILATOR- INDUCED LUNG INJURY (VILI)
As with most medical therapies, mechanical ventilation can be harmful. 
Pathophysiology of VILI can be multifactorial. Large tidal volumes and 
high inspiratory pressures delivered with increased frequency cause cyclic 
strain, which may lead to disruption of the tight junctions between the 
alveolar epithelial and capillary endothelial cells, with intracapillary blebs 
resulting in alveolar and interstitial edema. This may cause the release of 
proinflammatory mediators (
biotrauma)
 that further injure the lung and 
travel in the blood outside the lung, contributing to the development of 
multiorgan failure. Evidence shows that in patients with ARDS, avoidance 
of V
t
 
≥
10 mL/kg and P
plat
 
≥
30 cm H
2
O limits diffuse alveolar damage.
Atelectrauma
 is shear stress on the alveolar walls caused by cyclic 
opening and closing of the alveoli. PEEP can be used to prevent col
-
lapse and keep alveoli open. It is important that alveolar units are 
neither overdistended nor collapsed. Careful adjustments of PEEP 
may also permit the clinician to wean a patient from a high F
io
2
, 
another potential source of lung injury, through exposure to reac
-
tive oxygen species 
(oxytrauma)
. Although most patients receive an 
F
io
2
 of 1.0 at the time of endotracheal intubation and at the begin
-
ning of mechanical ventilation, increasing PEEP to recruit alveoli 
without overdistention should be quickly instituted to improve oxy
-
genation and permit weaning of the F
io
2
. Although the F
io
2
 value 
below which there is no risk of oxygen toxicity is unknown, most 
clinicians aim for a value <0.6. Regional mechanics may play a role 
in lung injury.
Ventilator- Associated Pneumonia
The pathophysiology of ventilator- associated pneumonia (VAP) is 
multifactorial. Aspiration of oral and/or gastric secretions, coloniza
-
tion	of	the	ETT,	and	suppression	of	cough	reflexes	from	sedation	all	
play a role. New- onset fever and leukocytosis accompanied by demon
-
stration of an infiltrative process on chest radiography are consistent 
with a diagnosis of VAP. This complication can lead to worsened gas 
exchange, increased duration of ventilation, and even death. Elevation 
of the head of the bed to 30 degrees after initiation of mechanical venti
-
lation and use of a protocol for oral decontamination during mechani
-
cal ventilation are common means of reducing the risk for VAP. The 
most effective strategy to minimize any of the aforementioned com
-
plications is regular assessment of extubation readiness and liberation 
from mechanical ventilation as soon as clinically possible.
 
Weaning
Weaning from mechanical ventilation should be considered as a 
patient’s respiratory insufficiency begins to improve. Most pediatri
-
cians favor gradual weaning from ventilator support. With SIMV, the 
ventilator rate is slowly reduced, allowing the patient’s spontaneous 
breaths (typically assisted with pressure or volume support) to assume 
a larger proportion of the minute ventilation. When the ventilator rate 
is low (<5 breaths/min) such that its contribution to minute ventilation 
is minimal, assessment of extubation readiness is performed. An alter
-
native method of gradual weaning is transition to PSV. In this mode, no 
ventilator rate is set, allowing all triggered breaths to be assisted with 
pressure support. The clinician reduces the pressure support slowly to 
a low value (<5- 10 cm H
2
O), at which point assessment of extubation 
readiness is performed. During either technique, weaning should be 
halted if tachypnea, increased work of breathing, hypoxemia, hyper
-
capnia, acidosis, diaphoresis, tachycardia, or hypotension occurs.
The most objective means of assessing extubation readiness is a 
spon
-
taneous breathing trial (SBT)
.	Before	performance	of	an	SBT,	a	patient	
should be awake with intact airway reflexes, capable of handling oropha
-
ryngeal secretions, and with stable hemodynamic status. In addition, gas 
exchange should be adequate, defined as Pa
o
2
 >60 mm Hg while receiv
-
ing F
io
2
 <0.4 and PEEP 
≤
5 cm H
2
O. If these criteria are present, a patient 
should be started on CPAP with minimal (
≤
5 cm H
2
O) or no pressure 
support.	If	this	SBT	is	tolerated	with	no	episodes	of	respiratory	or	cardio
-
vascular decompensation, successful extubation is likely.
Some neonates and small children cannot be calmed or consoled long 
enough	to	complete	the	SBT.	In	this	situation,	extubation	readiness	must	
be assessed on a low level of ventilator support. Data suggest a low risk 
of extubation failure if the patient is comfortable and has stable hemody
-
namic status, with adequate gas exchange and spontaneous V
t
 >6.5 mL/
kg while receiving <20% of total minute ventilation from the ventilator. 
Certain patient populations are at increased risk for extubation failure, 
such as young infants, children mechanically ventilated for longer than 7 
days, and patients with chronic respiratory or neurologic conditions. These 
children often benefit from transition to a noninvasive form of respiratory 
support (e.g., high- flow nasal cannula, CPAP, or BiPAP) upon liberation 
from mechanical ventilation to increase the odds of successful extubation.
The likelihood of 
postextubation upper airway obstruction
, the most 
common cause of extubation failure in children, cannot be predicted by 
the	results	of	an	SBT	or	bedside	measurements	of	physiologic	variables.	
Traumatic	endotracheal	intubation	and	subglottic	swelling	from	ETT	irri
-
tation, especially in patients who exhibit agitation while receiving mechan
-
ical ventilation, are common causes of airway narrowing after extubation. 
Administration of intravenous corticosteroids (dexamethasone 0.5 mg/kg 
every 6 hr for four doses 
before extubation) has been shown to decrease 
the incidence of postextubation airway obstruction. In patients in whom 
postextubation airway obstruction develops, the need for reintubation 
may be obviated by administration of nebulized racemic epinephrine and 
helium- oxygen mixtures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
PIPPEEPpause
InspiratoryTime
ExpiratoryPplat
Fig. 86.12
 Alveolar pressure is best determined by measurement of 
plateau pressure (P
plat
). Inspiration is paused for an extended period, and 
alveolar gas pressure is allowed to equilibrate with the ventilator circuit 
pressure. Airway pressure at the end of the inspiratory pause is P
plat
. The 
difference between peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) and P
plat
 is meant to 
overcome flow- resistive properties of the lung, whereas P
plat
 reflects the 
pressure needed to overcome elastic properties of the lung and chest 
wall. PEEP, Positive end- expiratory pressure.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 87
 u 
Altitude- Associated  Illness in Children 
631
blood cells, which begin to appear in the circulation in 4 or 5 days. 
Hypoxemia also increases 2,3- DPG, resulting in a rightward shift 
of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve and favoring release of 
oxygen	from	the	blood	to	the	tissues.	This	is	counteracted	by	the	
leftward shift of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve caused by 
the	respiratory	alkalosis	from	hyperventilation.	The	result	is	a	net	
null change in the oxyhemoglobin curve and an increase in oxygen- 
hemoglobin binding in the lung, raising Sa
o
2
. Climbers at extreme 
altitude respond with marked hyperventilation, alkalosis, and left
-
ward	shift.	This	leftward	shift	favors	oxygen	loading	in	a	hypoxic	
environment and increases Sa
o
2
.
 
ACUTE MOUNTAIN SICKNESS
Epidemiology and Risk Factors
The incidence of high- altitude illness depends on several variables, 
including the rate of ascent, previous altitude exposure, and individ
-
ual genetic susceptibility. Sleeping altitude, final altitude reached, and 
duration of stay at altitude are also risk factors for AMS development. 
Individual susceptibility for the development of AMS plays a signifi
-
cant role in risk assessment. Most individuals with previous histories of 
AMS after acute ascent are likely to experience similar symptoms with 
repeated visits to altitude. Gender and age do not affect the incidence 
of AMS.
AMS is very common with 
rapid ascent
. Climbers around the 
world who ascend quickly (1 or 2 days) from sea level to altitudes of 
4,000- 6,000 m (
∼
13,000- 20,000 ft) have a very high incidence of AMS 
(27–83%). The rapid ascent profile associated with air travel to high 
altitude	locations	also	results	in	high	AMS	rates.	Trekkers	who	fly	into	
the Khumbu region to explore the Mt. Everest area have a higher inci
-
dence of AMS (47%) compared with those who walk (23%). Skiers who 
visit resorts in the western United States from sea level generally fly 
or drive to the region but sleep at relatively moderate altitudes: 2,000- 
3,000 m (
∼
6,500- 9,800 ft). Among this population, AMS occurs in 
approximately 25%.
 
Pathophysiology
The	symptoms	of	AMS	develop	several	hours	after	arrival	at	high	
altitude, whereas the development of HAPE and HACE gener
-
ally require several days of altitude exposure. Because hypoxemia 
occurs within minutes of arrival, it cannot be the direct cause 
of high- altitude illness, but rather the initiating factor for a cas
-
cade of events that lead to the development of the altitude clinical 
syndromes.
The	clinical	manifestations	of	AMS/HACE	are	primarily	the	
result of central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction caused by 
hemodynamic mechanical factors and biochemical mediators of 
permeability.	The	CNS	vasodilatory	response	to	hypoxemia	causes	
an increase in cerebral blood flow and volume. Significant elevation 
of brain volume is observed in moderate to severe AMS and HACE 
but has not been demonstrated in mild AMS. Hypoxic alteration 
of CNS vascular autoregulation and hypertension from exercise 
may increase pressure transmission to the brain’s capillary beds, 
resulting in transcapillary leakage and vasogenic edema. Inflamma
-
tory mediators also contribute to vascular permeability and edema 
formation. HIF- mediated vascular endothelial growth factor, the 
inducible form of nitric oxide synthase, reactive cytokines, and 
free radical formation can increase permeability. Both mechanical 
and biochemical activation of the trigeminovascular system have 
been proposed as the cause of 
high- altitude headache,
 the primary 
symptom of AMS. Although vasogenic edema has been implicated 
in severe AMS and HACE, MRI reveals signal changes in subjects 
with and without clinical AMS.
Many of these responses to hypoxia and altitude exposure occur 
both in individuals who develop symptoms and those who remain free 
of	AMS.	To	address	the	discrepancy	in	symptomatic	illness,	the	“tight	
fit” hypothesis was proposed. This theory suggests that the develop
-
ment of AMS/HACE is due to a lack of intracranial space to accommo
-
date increasing volume from brain swelling and edema that develop at 
altitude. The adequacy of the intracranial and intraspinal space to buf
-
fer changes in brain and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) volume is the central 
concept. Buffering occurs as the intracranial CSF is displaced via the 
foramen magnum into the space available in the spinal canal, followed 
by increased CSF absorption and decreased CSF production. Individuals 
with less CSF buffering capacity have less compliance and are hypoth
-
esized to become more symptomatic (develop AMS).
 
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of AMS in older children and adults requires the history 
of a recent gain in altitude, presence at the new altitude for at least 
several hours, and the report of a headache plus one or more of the 
following symptoms: gastrointestinal (GI) upset (anorexia, nausea, or 
vomiting), general weakness or fatigue, dizziness, or lightheadedness. 
The 
2018 Lake Louise Acute Mountain Sickness Score
 is based on 
self- report of symptoms and aids clinicians in making the diagnosis 
and quantifying AMS severity in older children and adolescents (
Table	
87.1
). Symptoms develop within a few hours after ascent and generally 
reach maximum severity between 24 and 48 hours, followed by gradual 
resolution. Sleep disturbance caused by periodic breathing is common 
in all visitors to high altitudes and is not part of the adult diagnos
-
tic criteria; sleep disturbance is likely the result of hypoxia rather than 
AMS. There are no diagnostic physical signs in cases of mild AMS. Any 
evidence of CNS dysfunction, such as mild ataxia or altered mentation, 
is early evidence of HACE. Similarly, whereas shortness of breath on 
exertion is common at high altitudes, dyspnea at rest is an early indica
-
tor of HAPE.
able 87.1 
 
  2018 Lake Louise Acute Mountain Sickness 
Score
HEADACHE
0 – None at all
1 – Mild headache
2 – Moderate headache
3 – Severe headache, incapacitating
GASTROINTESTINAL SYMPTOMS
0 – Good appetite
1 – Poor appetite or nausea
2 – Moderate nausea or vomiting
3 – Severe nausea and vomiting, incapacitating
FATIGUE AND/OR WEAKNESS
0 – Not tired or weak
1 – Mild fatigue/weakness
2 – Moderate fatigue/weakness
3 – Severe fatigue/weakness, incapacitating
DIZZINESS/LIGHTHEADEDNESS
0 – No dizziness/lightheadedness
1 – Mild dizziness/lightheadedness
2 – Moderate dizziness/lightheadedness
3 – Severe dizziness/lightheadedness, incapacitating
AMS CLINICAL FUNCTIONAL SCORE
Overall, if you had AMS symptoms, how did they affect your 
 
activities?
0 – Not at all
1 – Symptoms present, but did not force any change in activity or 
itinerary
2 – My symptoms forced me to stop the ascent or to go down on my 
own power
3 – Had to be evacuated to a lower altitude
To obtain the AMS score, add number from each category earlier. 
Although no official severity rankings exist, many consider mild 
AMS to be 3- 5 points, moderate AMS 6- 9 points, and severe AMS 
10- 12 points.
From Roach RC, Hackett PH, Oelz O, et al. The 2018 Lake Louise Acute Mountain 
Sickness Score. 
High Alt Med Biol
. 2018;19(1):4–6, 
Table 1.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

632 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
The diagnosis of AMS in children with early language skills (age 4- 11 
years) may be made with cautious use of the 2018 Lake Louise criteria 
(see 
Table	87.1
). The language used in this adult questionnaire may be 
too complex and may underestimate AMS if not understood by the 
child. This is particularly true for questions regarding headache (the 
key symptom of AMS) and GI symptoms.
In preverbal young children and infants, recognition of AMS 
relies on observable signs and exclusion of other causes. In this age 
range, AMS is manifested by increased fussiness, decreased playful
-
ness, decreased appetite, and sleep disturbance. In most cases of AMS 
in very young children, all these symptoms are present. Fussiness is 
defined as a state of irritability that is not easily explained by another 
cause, such as tiredness, wet diaper, hunger, teething, or pain from an 
injury. Fussy behavior may include crying, restlessness, or muscular 
tension. Decreased playfulness may be profound. Alterations of appe
-
tite may progress to frank vomiting. Sleep disturbance can manifest 
with either increased or decreased sleep when compared with normal 
patterns. Most often, decreased sleep and the inability to nap are noted.
The Children’s Lake Louise Score (CLLS) has been successfully tested 
in preverbal children <4 years old by parents briefed on the use of the 
scoring system. The CLLS combines a score for the amount and inten
-
sity of unexplained fussiness with a symptom score of how well the 
child has eaten, played, and slept in the past 24 hours. Evaluating for 
the presence of headache can be accomplished by asking if the “head 
hurts” or by using a visual “faces” pain scale. GI symptoms are evalu
-
ated by asking children if they are “hungry” rather than trying to evalu
-
ate their appetite. A combined score of 
≥
7 is indicative of AMS (
Fig. 
87.1
). Many of the symptoms manifested by AMS in children may also 
result from the disruption of the normal routine with travel. A change 
in environment, sleeping accommodation, or eating options can result 
in a fussy child. The threshold scores for AMS diagnostic criteria are 
modified to account for these baseline variations. Educating parents to 
recognize the symptoms of AMS in themselves is also important, as an 
ill parent can indirectly compromise a child’s safety.
Other acute illnesses can mimic AMS in young children. 
It must be 
emphasized that altered mental status, neurologic abnormalities, breath
-
ing difficulty, and cyanosis are not part of uncomplicated AMS.
 
Any of 
these signs warrant immediate medical attention.
 If serious bacte
-
rial illness, a surgical condition, or another problem meriting specific 
intervention is suspected in a child, descent to lower altitude is recom
-
mended to eliminate the confounding variable of altitude illness.
 
Periodic Breathing
Periodic breathing at altitude is common at all ages during sleep, 
resulting in brief repeated episodes of oxyhemoglobin desaturation. 
Prepubertal children (9- 12 years old) have similar nighttime oxygen 
desaturations as their parents; however, they have somewhat more sta
-
ble breathing patterns with less periodicity. Although periodic breath
-
ing is not a sign of AMS, the exacerbation of hypoxia during sleep plays 
a role in AMS development. Newborn infants normally have period
-
icity in their respiratory pattern, and this periodicity is increased by 
high- altitude exposure and sleep. Oxygen saturations of awake neo
-
nates born at 3,100 m (
∼
10,100 ft) in Colorado range from 88% to 91%. 
During sleep with increased periodic breathing, oxygen saturation may 
drop to 81% during the first week of life. The amount and magnitude 
of respiratory periodicity decrease as the child matures, and saturation 
during sleep increases to 86% after 2 months. A stable mature pattern 
is usually reached by 6 months of age. Preterm babies may demon
-
strate marked periodicity with prolonged desaturation because of their 
immaturity. Acute ascent with a child born preterm is best delayed 
until maturity, when normal pulmonary function and respiratory drive 
can be demonstrated. Parents of normal young babies may become dis
-
tressed as they note marked periodic breathing patterns in their child 
after ascent to moderate altitude. Clinicians can reassure parents that 
this is generally not a precursor of true apnea; desaturation can occur 
with periodic breathing in sleep, especially at higher altitudes.
 
Management
The management of AMS must include strict adherence to the 
principle that further ascent to a higher sleeping altitude is 
contraindicated after the symptoms of altitude illness occur.
 Halt
-
ing ascent or activity to allow further acclimatization may reverse the 
symptoms; however, continuing the ascent exacerbates the underly
-
ing pathologic processes and may lead to disastrous results. Stopping 
further ascent and waiting for acclimatization treats most AMS in 1- 4 
days. Mild cases of AMS may be treated without descent if monitor
-
ing by a reliable caregiver is available. Conservative treatment may be 
provided, including rest, analgesics for headache, and antiemetics for 
nausea. When conservative measures are inadequate, acetazolamide 
and/or oxygen titrated to maintain Sa
o
2
 >94% are generally effective. 
Although no studies have formally assessed its use in pediatric patients, 
anecdotal reports have demonstrated efficacy of acetazolamide in treat
-
ing mild AMS in this population. AMS that becomes worse or does not 
respond to maintenance of altitude, rest, and pharmacologic interven
-
tion mandates descent. Descent (500- 1,000 m, 
∼
1,600- 3,300 ft) is effec
-
tive treatment for all forms of altitude illness and should be tailored 
to the individual response. The presence of neurologic abnormalities 
(e.g., ataxia or altered mentation) mandates descent because these 
signs indicate a progression of AMS to severe altitude illness (HACE).
Supplemental oxygen administration relieves AMS symptoms, 
including small amounts (1- 2 L/min) given during sleep. In the wilder
-
ness, oxygen tanks are impractically heavy and are usually unavailable 
in adequate amounts; therefore oxygen therapy is usually reserved for 
the more serious manifestations of high- altitude illness. Hyperbaric 
therapy that simulates descent is also effective.
        RATE HOW WELL YOUR CHILD HAS EATEN TODAY (E)0—Normal1—Slightly less than normal
2—Much less than normal
3—Vomiting or not eating
                RATE HOW PLAYFUL YOUR CHILD IS TODAY (P)0—Normal
1—Playing slightly less
2—Playing much less than normal
3—Not playing
                RATE ABILITY OF YOUR CHILD TO SLEEP TODAY (S)0—Normal
1—Slightly less or more than normal
2—Much less or more than normal
3—Not able to sleep
The CLLS must be 
H113507 with both the FS H113504 and E+P+S H11350
3 to confirmacute mountain sickness.
CLLS = FS + E + P + SFUSSINESS SCORE  (FS) = Amount + IntensityNoFussinessModerateFussinessINTENSITY OF FUSSINESSSevere FussinessWhen Awake0123456NoFussinessIntermittentFussiness
AMOUNT OF UNEXPLAINED FUSSINESS
Constant FussinessWhen Awake0123456
Fig. 87.1
 Children’s Lake Louise Score (CLLS). Fussiness is defined 
as a state of irritability that is not easily explained by a cause, such 
as tiredness, hunger, teething, or pain from an injury. Fussy behavior 
may include crying, restlessness, or muscular tension. Please rate your 
child’s typical fussy behavior 
during the last 24 hours
 without the ben
-
efit of your intervention.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 87
 u 
Altitude- Associated  Illness in Children 
633
Treatment	of	headache	and	nausea	can	be	beneficial	for	mild	AMS,	and	
in many cases this may be all that is necessary. Evidence supports the use 
of ibuprofen and acetaminophen for the treatment of high- altitude head
-
ache in children; aspirin and combination products containing aspirin 
should be avoided in children because of possible association with Reye 
syndrome. For nausea and vomiting, ondansetron may be used.
Acetazolamide is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor that induces a renal 
bicarbonate diuresis, causing a metabolic acidosis that increases ventila
-
tion and arterial oxygenation. This respiratory stimulation improves sleep 
when the hypoxemia caused by periodic breathing is eradicated by acet
-
azolamide. Acetazolamide accelerates acclimatization and, if given early in 
the development of AMS, rapidly resolves symptoms. Anecdotal experi
-
ence supports the use of acetazolamide in children, particularly when con
-
servative measures have been insufficient (
Table	87.2
).	Treatment	for	48	
hours is usually adequate for resolution of symptoms. Acetazolamide may 
be prepared as a solution by a compounding pharmacy.
Adverse reactions to acetazolamide in adults include paresthesias, poly
-
uria, and taste alterations for carbonated beverages. Less common reac
-
tions include nausea, drowsiness, tinnitus, transient myopia, and rarely, 
rash. Acetazolamide is a nonantibiotic sulfa compound that carries a low 
risk of cross- reactivity for individuals with an allergy to sulfa antibiotics. 
A history of anaphylaxis or severe skin reactions to any sulfa- containing 
medication contraindicates the use of acetazolamide. Acetazolamide 
should be avoided in breastfeeding mothers and pregnant women.
Dexamethasone is an effective alternative treatment for AMS in 
adults. Although dexamethasone can resolve the symptoms of AMS, 
it does not play a role in acclimatization, and symptoms may recur 
when the treatment is withdrawn. Adverse reactions to dexamethasone 
of concern in the pediatric population are pancreatitis, pseudotumor 
cerebri, and interference with normal growth. Although these reac
-
tions are generally seen with prolonged use, dexamethasone should be 
used for treatment in children only in extreme situations where alter
-
natives such as descent or oxygen therapy are unavailable.
 
Prevention
Individuals who have a known susceptibility to the development of AMS 
and those for whom slow ascent is impractical may consider prophylactic 
medication. 
Acetazolamide remains the compound of choice for AMS pro
-
phylaxis.
 Numerous studies have demonstrated its effectiveness in adults 
starting 24 hours before ascent and continuing for the first 2 days at high 
altitude. Controlled studies for prophylaxis with acetazolamide in children 
are unavailable; however, anecdotal evidence supports its use (see 
Table	
87.2
). Ibuprofen, when compared with acetazolamide, has been found to 
be equally efficacious in preventing headache in adults. Dexamethasone 
also prevents AMS; however, the potential adverse effects in children 
preclude its use for prophylaxis in this age group. Recommendations for 
hyperhydration are frequently given in the lay literature, yet no evidence 
supports this advice. Drinking excessive amounts of free water may lead to 
hyponatremia and possibly complicate altitude illness.
 
HIGH- ALTITUDE CEREBRAL EDEMA
Epidemiology and Risk Factors
HACE is rare and may occur in children. Prompt recognition and treat
-
ment are necessary, because if unrecognized, it is rapidly fatal. HACE is 
generally seen in adults with prolonged stays above 4,000 m (
∼
13,000 ft), 
but in rare cases has been reported as low as 2,100 m (
∼
6,900 ft). HACE 
is usually associated with concurrent AMS or HAPE, but can occur on its 
own.
 
Pathophysiology
HACE is regarded as the extreme expression of the same pathophysiol
-
ogy underlying AMS. The edema and increased intracranial pressure are 
believed to be primarily caused by a vasogenic process where fluid moves 
from the vascular to the interstitial space due to a combination of increased 
hydrostatic pressure and increased vascular permeability. In the later stages 
of HACE, a cytotoxic component may contribute to the edema. These pro
-
posed mechanisms are supported by MRI studies revealing white matter 
changes consistent with vasogenic and cytotoxic edema.
 
Diagnosis
HACE is differentiated from severe AMS by the presence of 
neurologic 
signs
. Most common are ataxia and altered mental status, including con
-
fusion, progressive decrease in responsiveness, and eventually coma. Less 
common are focal cranial nerve palsies, motor and sensory deficits, and 
seizures.	CT	imaging	is	consistent	with	edema	and	increased	intracranial	
pressure.	MRI	shows	a	high	T2	signal	in	the	white	matter,	specifically	in	
the splenium of the corpus callosum, with diffusion- weighted technique.
 
Management
Descent remains the most effective treatment for HACE.
 Supplemen
-
tal oxygen, if available, is useful, especially if descent is not possible or 
able 87.2 
 
 Medications for Treatment of Altitude-Associated Illness in Children
*
MEDICATION
CLASSIFICATION
INDICATION
DOSE AND ROUTE
ADVERSE EFFECTS
Acetazolamide
Carbonic anhydrase 
inhibitor
AMS treatment
2.5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours; 
 
maximum 250 mg/dose
Collateral effects include 
paresthesias, altered taste 
and visual acuity, electrolyte 
disturbance
AMS or re-entry 
HAPE prevention
1
1.25 mg/kg PO every 12 hours; 
maximum dose 125 mg/dose
Collateral effects reduced at 
lower doses
Dexamethasone
Steroid
AMS or HACE 
 
treatment
2
,
3
0.15 mg/kg PO/IM/IV every 6 hours; 
maximum 4 mg/dose
Hypertension, GI hemorrhage, 
pancreatitis, growth inhibition
Nifedipine
Calcium-channel blocker
HAPE treatment or 
prevention
4
If	>	50	kg	use	adult	dosing	of	
 
30 mg extended-release PO 
 
every 12 hours
Flushing, gastrointestinal 
 
distress, hypotension
Amlodipine
Calcium-channel blocker
HAPE treatment or 
prevention
4
,
5
1-5 years:
 0.1-0.6 mg/kg/dose PO 
daily; maximum 5 mg/day
6-17 years:
 2.5-5.0 mg PO daily 
(tablet or liquid suspension)
Flushing, abdominal pain, 
 
dizziness, hypotension
*No studies in children for high-altitude indications.
1
AMS prophylaxis is not routinely recommended in children but indicated when rapid ascent profile is unavoidable or previous altitude illness occurred in a child about to undergo 
similar ascent profile. AMS and re-entry HAPE prophylaxis should be started 24 hours before ascent and continued for 2 days at altitude.
2
Oxygen and descent are the treatment of choice for severe AMS. If acetazolamide is not tolerated, dexamethasone may be used. Oxygen, descent and dexamethasone should be 
used in HACE.
3
Prophylactic use of dexamethasone for AMS is not warranted because of potential adverse effects. Use slow graded ascent or acetazolamide.
4
In emergency settings where oxygen and descent are not an option, amlodipine or nifedipine may be used for treatment. Extended-release (ER) nifedipine formulations cannot be 
broken to obtain smaller doses. If 
≥
 50 kg, 30 mg extended-release nifedipine is preferred.
5
Amlodipine offers advantages over nifedipine for small children because of once daily dosing and availability as liquid or appropriately sized tablet.
Adapted from Luks AM, Beidleman BA, Freer L et al. Wilderness Medical Society Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Prevention, Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute Altitude Illness: 2024 
Update. 
Wilderness Environ Med
. 2023;Oct 11:S1080-6032(23)00167-9.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

634 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
delayed. Portable hyperbaric treatment is beneficial, but its use should 
not delay descent. Dexamethasone should be administered at a dose 
of 0.15 mg/kg per dose given orally every 6 hours to a maximum of 4 
mg per dose 
(see 
Table	87.2
). The few mild cases of HACE reported in 
children have recovered with dexamethasone 
and
 descent.
 
HIGH- ALTITUDE PULMONARY EDEMA
Epidemiology and Risk Factors
HAPE is a noncardiogenic pulmonary edema caused by intense pul
-
monary vasoconstriction and subsequent high capillary pressure, 
secondary to hypoxia, resulting in altered permeability of the alve
-
olocapillary membrane and the extravasation of intravascular fluid 
into the extravascular space of the lung. The development of HAPE 
depends on factors affecting pulmonary vasoreactivity, rate of ascent, 
altitude achieved, and time spent at that altitude. HAPE generally 
occurs in the setting of recent ascent, most often at altitudes above 
3,000 m (
∼
9,800 ft), but in some cases at altitudes as low as 1,740 m 
(
∼
5,700 ft). Among children HAPE occurs in 2 distinct settings. Most 
commonly, HAPE occurs in a child who resides at low altitude who 
travels to high altitude. Reentry HAPE affects children who reside 
at high altitude but become ill on their return home after descent to 
lower altitudes (see Special Considerations). HAPE may also occur 
with or without ascent in children who develop acute respiratory 
illnesses that exacerbate hypoxia at high altitude. Fatal outcomes of 
HAPE in children have been reported. Most mild and moderate cases 
resolve without difficulty; however, if unrecognized and untreated, 
rapid progression to death can occur, especially when infection or 
cardiac conditions complicate the illness.
HAPE affects male and female children more equally than adults, 
among whom the observed male predominance appears due to strenu
-
ous sport activities and military assignments. The occurrence, and even 
the pathophysiology, of HAPE may vary by population and genetic 
background. Several conditions may predispose a child to HAPE (
Table	
87.3
). Preexisting viral respiratory infections have been linked to HAPE, 
especially in children. Cardiorespiratory conditions associated with 
pulmonary hypertension, such as atrial and ventricular septal defects, 
pulmonary vein stenosis, congenital absence of a pulmonary artery, and 
obstructive sleep apnea, also predispose to HAPE. Down syndrome is a 
risk factor for HAPE development, as are previously repaired congenital 
heart defects and the presence of hypoplastic lungs. Undiagnosed struc
-
tural cardiopulmonary abnormalities may result in severe hypoxia and/
or altitude illness once ascent occurs; for this reason, a new diagnosis of 
HAPE in a child warrants active investigation of underlying causes.
 
Physiology
Alveolar hypoxia results in vasoconstriction of the pulmonary arterioles 
just proximal to the alveolar capillary bed. Hypoxic pulmonary vasocon
-
striction is a normal physiologic response to optimize ventilation/perfu
-
sion 
(
˙V/˙Q
) matching by redistributing regional pulmonary blood flow 
to areas of highest ventilation, thereby optimizing arterial oxygenation. 
However, under conditions that result in widespread alveolar hypoxia, 
extensive pulmonary vasoconstriction will lead to significant elevations in 
pulmonary arterial pressure, and uneven pulmonary vasoconstriction can 
result in localized overperfusion, increased capillary pressures, distention, 
and leakage in the remaining vessels. This explains the patchy and hetero
-
geneous edema that is classically observed in HAPE. The combination of 
pulmonary hypertension and uneven pulmonary vasoconstriction appears 
to be necessary in the pathogenesis of HAPE. Children and adolescents 
acutely exposed to high- altitude hypoxia demonstrate pulmonary hyper
-
tension, with increases in pulmonary artery pressure inversely related to 
age. Once the vascular leak occurs and alveolar fluid accumulates, a defect 
in transepithelial sodium transport impairs the clearance of alveolar fluid 
and contributes to HAPE.
The conditions that predispose to HAPE are often directly referable 
to elements in the cascade of pathophysiology. Viral infections result 
in inflammation that may predispose the pulmonary endothelium to 
mechanical injury and increase susceptibility to alveolar fluid accumu
-
lation and HAPE during ascent. Exercise and cold stress at altitude may 
increase hypoxemia and exacerbate pulmonary hypertension. Overper
-
fusion of a restricted vascular bed is illustrated by cases of congenital 
unilateral absence of a pulmonary artery in which the entire cardiac out
-
put is delivered to one lung, predisposing to pulmonary hypertension and 
overperfusion injury. Although data from mechanistic studies of children 
are lacking, adult HAPE- susceptible subjects have been characterized as 
having significantly elevated pulmonary artery pressure during altitude 
exposure and illness, altered vascular permeability, augmented hypoxic 
pulmonary vasoreactivity during hypoxia and normoxic exercise, blunted 
hypoxic ventilatory responsiveness, smaller lung volumes, and impaired 
alveolar fluid clearance.
 
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of HAPE is based on clinical findings and their evolu
-
tion in the context of recent ascent from lower elevation. There is no 
single diagnostic test or constellation of laboratory findings. Symptoms 
commonly develop within 24- 96 hours, and onset of symptoms often 
occurs during the first or second night at altitude, when hypoxia may 
be exacerbated during sleep. HAPE is rarely observed beyond 5 days 
after ascent to altitude (unless additional ascent occurs) because pul
-
monary vascular remodeling and acclimatization have taken place. The 
diagnosis of HAPE is made by observing the combination of symp
-
toms, including dyspnea at rest, cough, weakness, or decreased exercise 
performance, and signs including crackles or wheezing in at least one 
lung field, central cyanosis, tachypnea, or tachycardia. Determining the 
onset and timing of the illness relative to ascent and radiographic evi
-
dence of alveolar infiltrates may help confirm the diagnosis.
Table 87.3 
 
  Conditions Associated with Increased Risk of 
HAPE
ENVIRONMENTAL
Ascent above 2,500 m (
∼
8,200 ft)
Rapid	rate	of	ascent	(generally	>1,000	m	[
∼
3,300 ft] per day)
Cold exposure
CARDIAC
Anomalies causing increased pulmonary blood flow or increased 
pulmonary arterial pressure
	•		Ventricular	septal	defect,	atrial	septal	defect,	patent	foramen	ovale,	patent	
ductus arteriosus
	•		Anomalous	pulmonary	venous	return	or	pulmonary	vein	stenosis
	•		Unilateral	absent	pulmonary	artery	or	isolated	pulmonary	artery	of	ductal	
origin
Coarctation of the aorta
Congestive heart failure
PULMONARY
Chronic lung disease
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Cystic	fibrosis	(FEV-	1	<30%	predicted)
Pulmonary hypoplasia
Supplemental oxygen requirement at sea level
Pulmonary hypertension
Perinatal respiratory distress
Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn
Perinatal asphyxia or depression
Sleep apnea
INFECTIOUS
Upper respiratory tract infection
Bronchitis/bronchiolitis
Pneumonitis
Otitis media
PHARMACOLOGIC
Any medication causing central nervous system and respiratory 
depression
Alcohol
Sympathomimetics
SYSTEMIC
Down syndrome (trisomy 21)
History of premature birth or low birthweight
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 87
 u 
Altitude- Associated  Illness in Children 
635
The symptoms of AMS and HAPE show considerable overlap, and AMS 
may precede the development of HAPE in approximately half of patients. 
Frequently patients with HAPE first exhibit general malaise, which may 
progress to more specific signs of cardiopulmonary distress. Young chil
-
dren may show agitation and general debility. Older children may com
-
plain of headache, and children of all ages frequently experience nausea 
and vomiting. Cough is a common pulmonary sign. Dyspnea at rest, 
orthopnea, cyanosis, tachycardia, and chest pain herald worsening com
-
promise, which may advance within hours to production of pink- tinged 
sputum.
Findings on physical exam frequently are less severe than a patient’s 
chest radiograph and the hypoxemia on pulse oximetry would predict. 
Children often appear pale, with or without visible cyanosis. Low- grade 
fever (<38.5°C) is common, and respiratory rate is generally increased. 
Auscultation typically reveals rales, usually greater in the right lung than 
the left, on presentation. The radiographic pattern of pulmonary edema 
can be highly variable, from patchy and peripheral to more homoge
-
neous in severe cases. Often, the right lung shows more radiographic 
changes of edema than the left (
Fig. 87.2
). Cardiomegaly is an uncom
-
mon finding, but peribronchial and perivascular cuffing are frequent, as 
is enlargement of the pulmonary artery silhouette and dilation of more 
peripheral pulmonary arteries. Portable ultrasound has been shown 
useful to diagnose HAPE through the finding of “comet tails,” artifacts 
created by microreflections of the ultrasound beam within interlobular 
septae thickened by interstitial and/or alveolar edema. Significant arte
-
rial oxygen desaturation, as measured by pulse oximetry, is a consistent 
finding, with saturations frequently below 75%. A complete blood count 
often reveals a leukocytosis with a left shift of the granulocyte series.
The differential diagnosis of HAPE includes viral and bacterial 
pneumonia, bronchitis/bronchiolitis, asthma, vaping- associated lung 
disease, and other forms of cardiogenic and noncardiogenic pulmo
-
nary edema as well as pulmonary embolism. HAPE is most frequently 
misdiagnosed as pneumonia or a viral respiratory illness, especially 
when suspicion of altitude- associated pathology is not appropriately 
high. The presenting signs of cough, dyspnea, and orthopnea, followed 
by sputum production, can easily be misinterpreted as pneumonia, an 
impression that is reinforced by the frequent accompaniment of low- 
grade fever. Respiratory viral infections increase the risk of developing 
HAPE, which may lead to further confusion in diagnosis.
Complications of HAPE in children often relate to underlying, some
-
times undiagnosed, cardiopulmonary pathology or coexisting viral infec
-
tions, which potentiate the severity of pulmonary edema and pulmonary 
hypertension. Acute altitude exposure in such circumstances may lead to 
severe presentations that progress rapidly to extreme hypoxemia or car
-
diac failure and death. Children with Down syndrome, with or without 
structural cardiac anomalies, show increased susceptibility to HAPE and 
rapid symptom progression. Neonatal respiratory distress with pulmonary 
hypertension has been linked to exaggerated hypoxic pulmonary vaso
-
reactivity in early adulthood and thereby a theoretical predisposition to 
HAPE. Other conditions related to pulmonary overcirculation (atrial and 
ventricular septal defects, patent foramen ovale, patent ductus arteriosus), 
small cross- sectional area of the pulmonary vascular bed (unilateral absent 
pulmonary artery, pulmonary hypoplasia), obstruction to pulmonary 
venous return (total anomalous pulmonary venous return, pulmonary 
vein stenosis), or left- sided obstruction (coarctation of the aorta) poten
-
tiate HAPE. Recent inflammatory processes, such as viral infection, pre
-
dispose to HAPE and may worsen hypoxemia. Infection with respiratory 
syncytial virus in particular may trigger severe pulmonary hypertension.
 
Management
Descent with supplemental oxygen is the treatment of choice for HAPE in 
children.
 When feasible, or in the absence of medical care, rapid descent 
of at least 500- 1,000 m (
∼
1,500- 3,300 ft) usually results in rapid recovery. 
As with all altitude illness, the magnitude of the descent is tailored to the 
resolution of symptoms. Oxygen and bed rest without descent can be safe 
and effective treatment for mild HAPE in children where careful medical 
observation is available.
Supplemental oxygen at altitude is administered at 2- 6 L/min by 
nasal cannula for 48- 72 hours to maintain an arterial oxygen satura
-
tion of at least 90%. Increasing oxygen saturation above 90% does not 
result in further reduction in pulmonary artery pressure and does not 
accelerate edema resolution in adults. Oxygen flow can be weaned with 
improvement in symptoms and saturations; at flow rates below 2- 4 L/
min, children may be sufficiently stable and comfortable to continue 
treatment at home under the monitoring of family. Instructions to 
avoid physical exertion and exposure to cold should be given to reduce 
exposure to factors known to elevate pulmonary artery pressure. Most 
children experience complete resolution of mild HAPE within 24- 72 
hours of oxygen therapy when treated at the altitude of symptom onset.
Pharmacotherapy for pediatric HAPE is rarely needed because oxygen 
and descent are so effective. In emergency situations without the options 
of supplemental oxygen or descent, pharmacotherapy aimed at reducing 
pulmonary hypertension is indicated (see 
Table	87.2
). Although not sys
-
tematically studied in children, nifedipine is indicated for the treatment 
of adult HAPE. Amlodipine offers advantages over nifedipine in children 
because of daily dosing and availability of a liquid suspension. Patients 
should be monitored for hypotension during calcium channel blocker 
administration.
 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Reentry HAPE and HAPE in High- Altitude Residents 
Without Travel
Children residing at high altitude may experience reentry HAPE upon 
reascent to the altitude of residence after a sojourn to low altitude. 
Although stays at low altitude as short as 24 hours may be sufficient 
to trigger reentry HAPE, most cases occur after several days at lower 
altitude. Several case series have demonstrated that children between 
4 and 18 years of age are much more likely to develop reentry HAPE 
than adults. Observations from Colorado and Peru suggest that reentry 
HAPE may occur in 6–17% of children 2- 19 years of age compared with 
<1–3% of adult residents. Various explanations have been proposed for 
the greater incidence and severity of reentry HAPE among children, 
including general lack of moderated behavior on ascent, increased 
likelihood of preexisting inflammatory processes, developmental dif
-
ferences in endothelial cell tight junctions, occult chronic pulmonary 
artery hypertension, and retained pulmonary arteriolar muscularity 
with potential for elevated pulmonary arterial pressure and potentially 
uneven pulmonary arterial vasoconstriction.
Reentry HAPE has a significant probability of recurrence and may 
justify pharmacologic prophylaxis to prevent the accumulated burden 
AB
Fig. 87.2
 High- altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE). A healthy teenager 
who resides at low altitude flew to Denver, Colorado, with a school 
group and immediately drove to a ski resort at 9,300 feet. The following 
day he felt dizzy and complained of headache. Symptoms progressed 
over the next 2 days to include emesis, dyspnea, cough, and fatigue. 
He was taken to an emergency department, where pulse oximetry 
showed an arterial saturation of 51%. Chest x- ray was obtained. 
A,
 This 
diagnostic image of HAPE was obtained at the altitude of presentation. 
The chest x- ray shows patchy, nodular infiltrates generalized through 
the right lung and the left upper lobe. The patient was started on sup
-
plemental oxygen and transported to Denver. Saturations improved 
with descent and were 94% on room air at time of arrival. 
B,
 Repeat 
radiograph obtained at lower altitude 2 days after presentation with 
HAPE. This diagnostic image shows substantial resolution of patchy 
pulmonary edema. 
(Courtesy Children’s Hospital Colorado, Depart
-
ment of Radiology.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

636 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
of morbidity. There are no controlled trials of prophylaxis for reentry 
HAPE in children; however, acetazolamide has been used empirically 
(see 
Table	87.2
), based on its blunting of hypoxic pulmonary vaso
-
constriction in adults and the potential risk of hypotension and reflex 
tachycardia with calcium channel blockers.
HAPE can also occur in children residing at high altitude without 
travel, and it should be considered in the differential diagnosis of chil
-
dren who present with hypoxemia at high altitude. The chest radio
-
graph may be consistent with HAPE or viral pneumonia. When rapid 
improvement with oxygen and little to no response to bronchodila
-
tors suggest HAPE, the use of antibiotics and other treatments can be 
minimized.
 
Symptomatic High- Altitude Pulmonary Hypertension
Infants and young children residing at high altitude may experience symp
-
tomatic high- altitude pulmonary hypertension (SHAPH). All infants, 
regardless of altitude of gestation and birth, have thickened and mus
-
cularized interlobular and intralobular pulmonary arteries and pulmo
-
nary artery pressures that are initially near systemic. Although muscular 
regression and fall in pulmonary artery pressure occur rapidly at sea level, 
infants permanently residing at high altitude demonstrate slowed regres
-
sion of these characteristics through infancy and even childhood. Similar 
changes may occur in infants who experience pulmonary complications at 
birth (respiratory distress syndrome of prematurity, persistent pulmonary 
hypertension of the newborn). Infants with SHAPH become symptomatic 
with exaggerated hypoxemia and signs of subacute pulmonary hyperten
-
sion; these signs correlate with pathologic findings of right ventricular 
hypertrophy and dilation, increased muscularization of the pulmonary 
arterial bed, and eventual right- sided congestive heart failure. Although 
supplemental oxygen and medications may be used, definitive treatment is 
relocation to a lower altitude.
 
Cognitive Dysfunction
It is known that adults may have reversible changes in cognitive func
-
tion with acute exposure to high altitude. A small study evaluating 
cognitive function in healthy 10-  to 17- year- old children found impair
-
ment in verbal short- term memory, episodic memory, and executive 
functions 24 hours after ascent to 3,450 m (
∼
11,400 ft). These findings 
were no longer present upon reassessment 3 months after returning to 
sea level. Similar results were found in children with permanent resi
-
dence at high altitude; however, additional study is needed to assess the 
long- term implications of these findings.
 
Travel with Young Infants
Newborn infants retain some of the circulatory characteristics of recent 
fetal life, and these can pose a unique risk for altitude exposure. The 
fetal circulation has high pulmonary resistance, low pulmonary blood 
flow, and both intracardiac and extracardiac shunts that optimize oxy
-
genation via the placenta instead of the fetal lungs. After birth, a transi
-
tion begins that closes fetal shunts and establishes normal pulmonary 
circulation and oxygen transport. Exposure to marked hypoxia can 
result in reversion to fetal shunting patterns despite the absence of a 
placenta. Normal infants at sea level complete these changes in 4- 6 
weeks, though for infants born at moderate or high altitude, changes 
may	last	3	months	or	longer.	Travel	to	high	altitude	with	young	infants	
is generally safe after 4- 6 weeks, when circulatory changes have 
occurred, breastfeeding is established, and congenital abnormalities 
may have been detected.
Air travel with young infants frequently raises questions about the 
effects of exposure to hypobaric hypoxia, as the pressurization of air
-
craft cabins may vary up to an altitude equivalent of 8,500 ft (
∼
2,600 
m). Even transoceanic flights are generally not long enough to trigger 
AMS or HAPE. However, infants may experience transient desatura
-
tion with feedings during flight and likely experience discomfort due 
to dry air and stress resulting from noise and vibration, much as adults 
do. Former preterm infants without chronic lung disease who have 
attained 3 months corrected gestational age do not appear to experi
-
ence greater hypoxia during air travel than term infants; infants with 
more significant lung disease merit hypoxic challenge or provision of 
supplemental oxygen in flight.
 
Sickle Cell Disease/Trait
Children with sickle cell disease or sickle cell trait should avoid travel 
to altitude, as hypoxemia may trigger intravascular sickling, leading 
to acute vasoocclusive pain crises or splenic infarction or sequestra
-
tion. Up to 20% of pediatric patients with sickle cell disease and sickle- 
thalassemia disease may experience a vasoocclusive crisis at moderate 
altitude or in pressurized aircraft. Oxygen is advised for air travelers 
with known sickle cell disease. Although many children with sickle cell 
trait remain asymptomatic, children can experience splenic ischemia 
or infarction with severe left upper quadrant pain.
 
Recommendations for High- Altitude Travel with 
Children
A comprehensive approach to travel to high altitude with children should 
focus on 3 phases: planning the ascent and assessment of risk, recognition 
and management of altitude- associated illness, and follow- up of any illness 
relative to future travel or diagnostic testing necessary. Planning for travel 
to high altitude with children should consider rate of ascent, formulation 
of an emergency plan for communication and evacuation, and availability 
of medical care at the high- altitude destination. Slow ascent with time for 
acclimatization is the best prevention for all forms of altitude illness. Ide
-
ally, the first night should not be spent at an altitude higher than 2,800 m 
(9,000 ft), and then 2- 3 nights should be spent at 2,500- 3,000 m (
∼
8,200- 
9,800 ft), with a subsequent increase (to a new sleeping altitude) of not 
more than 500 m (1,600 ft) each night. One extra night of acclimatization 
(at the same sleeping altitude) should be taken for every 1,000 m (
∼
3,300 
ft) gained. Rapid ascent by air may be avoidable through alternative routes 
or means of transportation. Difficult descent situations (where further 
ascent may be necessary before descent is possible) should be avoided 
with children. Widespread coverage by cellular and satellite phone service 
may give a false sense of security in remote regions where both terrain and 
weather can limit the arrival of definitive help.
Prompt recognition of altitude- associated illness requires awareness 
of the context in which illness occurs and familiarity with the signs 
and symptoms. Parents are generally adept at recognizing deviation 
from baseline behavior of their children. Scales such as the Lake Louise 
Acute Mountain Sickness Score and CLLS may aid parents in modify
-
ing activity and/or seeking treatment. Clinicians should emphasize to 
parents that breathing difficulty, cyanosis, cough productive of pink- 
tinged sputum, altered mental status, and neurologic abnormalities are 
not
 part of uncomplicated AMS, but instead are serious signs of poten
-
tial HAPE or HACE that deserve immediate medical attention.
Descent is the mainstay of therapy for all forms of altitude- associated 
illness in children
. When descent is not feasible or illness is mild, other 
therapeutic options may be considered. Severe altitude illness or death 
can be avoided in children by adherence to three general principles:
 1.  Recognition of the early signs of altitude illness and willingness by 
adult caregivers to acknowledge them
 2.  No further ascent, especially to sleep at a higher altitude, when expe
-
riencing even minor symptoms/signs of altitude illness
 3.  Immediate descent if signs/symptoms worsen while resting/receiv
-
ing treatment at the altitude of onset
Altitude- associated illness in children merits follow- up with the pri
-
mary care physician. Uncomplicated AMS with full resolution of symp
-
toms upon descent or treatment does not require diagnostic workup, but 
may prompt discussion of slower ascent, specific plans for treatment, or 
even prophylaxis for future travel. Signs of HAPE or severe hypoxemia in a 
child out of proportion to the altitude reached should prompt further diag
-
nostic evaluation, including consideration of echocardiography. Underly
-
ing cardiac conditions may not be apparent on physical examination at 
low altitude; therefore cardiac catheterization or echocardiography under 
conditions of controlled hypoxia or hypoxic exercise may be necessary. 
Families of HAPE- susceptible children should be advised to avoid travel 
during or shortly after viral infections.
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr. Dunbar Ivy and Dr. Deborah Liptzin for their 
careful review of the manuscript.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88
 u 
Drowning and  Submersion Injury 
637
Drowning is the second most frequent cause of unintentional injury 
death among children in the United States after traffic accidents. Pre
-
vention is the most important step to reducing the impact of drowning 
injury, followed by early initiation of cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR) at the scene.
ETIOLOGY
Children are at risk of drowning when they are exposed to a water 
hazard in their environment. The World Congress on Drowning and 
the World Health Organization (WHO) definition of drowning is “the 
process of experiencing respiratory impairment from submersion/
immersion in liquid.” Drowning outcomes are classified as death, no 
morbidity, or morbidity further divided into moderately or severely 
disabled, vegetative state/coma, and brain death. Use of confusing 
descriptive terms such as “near,” “wet,” “dry,” “secondary,” “silent,” “pas
-
sive,” and “active” should not be used.
 
EPIDEMIOLOGY
From 2010 to 2020, an average of 4012 people per year were victims of 
fatal drowning
, and an estimated 8061 persons per year were treated 
in U.S. hospital emergency departments (EDs) for 
nonfatal drowning
. 
Compared with other types of injuries, drowning has one of the highest 
case fatality rates and is in the top 10 causes of death related to uninten
-
tional injuries for all pediatric age- groups. In 2019, the highest drown
-
ing death rates were seen in children age 1- 4 years (crude rate of 2.4 
per 100,000); in children age 1- 4 years, drowning was the number- one 
cause of death from 
unintentional injury
 in the United States in 2019 
(
Fig. 88.1
). Rates of fatal drowning hospitalization declined by 
∼
25% 
during the same period (
Fig. 88.2
).
The risk of drowning and the circumstances leading to it vary by age. 
Drowning risk also relates to other host factors, including male sex, 
alcohol or drug use, a history of seizures, autism, or cardiac arrhyth
-
mia, and swimming lessons. Environmental risk factors include expo
-
sure to water and varying supervision. These factors are embedded in 
the context of geography, climate, socioeconomic status, and culture.
Children <1 Year Old
Most (75%) drowning deaths in children younger than 1 year occur 
in the 
bathtub
, when an infant is left alone or with an older sibling. 
Infant tub seats or rings may exacerbate the risk by giving caregivers a 
false sense of security that the child is safe in the tub. The next major 
risk to children <1 year is the large (5- gallon) household bucket. These 
buckets are approximately 30 cm (1 ft) tall and designed not to tip over 
when half- full. The average 9- month- old child tends to be top- heavy 
and thus can easily fall headfirst into a half- full bucket, become stuck, 
and quickly drown.
 
Children 1- 4 Years Old
Drowning rates are consistently highest in 1-  to 4- year- old children, 
likely because of their curious but unaware nature, coupled with the 
rapid progression of their physical capabilities. A common factor in 
many of these deaths is a lapse in adult supervision, often reportedly <5 
minutes. Most U.S. drownings occur in residential 
swimming pools
. 
Usually, the child is in their own home, and the caregiver does not 
expect the child to be near the pool.
In rural areas, children 1- 4 years old often drown in irrigation 
ditches or nearby ponds and rivers. The circumstances are like those 
noted previously, in a body of water that is near the house. Drowning 
is one of the leading causes of 
farm injury–related deaths
 in children.
 
School- Age Children
School- age children are at increased risk of drowning in natural bod
-
ies of water such as lakes, ponds, rivers, and canals. Hazards such as 
unknown depths, undefined areas, and presence of currents and waves 
increase this risk. Although swimming pools account for most nonfa
-
tal drownings across all ages, 
natural waterways
 account for a higher 
death rate in children 10- 19 years old. Unlike for preschool children, 
Chapter 
88
Drowning and 
 Submersion Injury
William Benjamin Prince
0.0
2000200220042006
5–13 years314–17 years21–4 years1,2Under 1 year2
200820102012201420162018
0.51.01.5
Deaths per 100,000 population
2.02.53.0
3.5
Fig. 88.1
 Unintentional drowning death rates among children age 0- 
17 years, by age group: United States, 1999–2019. 
1
Rates significantly 
higher than those for other age groups over the study period, 
p
 < 0.05. 
2
Significant decreasing trend from 1999 through 2019, 
p
 < 0.05. 
3
Sig
-
nificant decreasing trend from 1999 through 2005 
p
 < 0.05; stable trend 
from 2005 through 2019.Notes: Unintentional drowning deaths are 
identified using 
International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision
 
underlying cause- of- death codes W65–W74 Accidental drowning and 
submersion. Rates shown are crude rates (deaths per 100,000). Source: 
National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, 
Mortality. 
(From Spencer MR, Hedegaard H, Warner M. Unintentional 
drowning deaths among children aged 0- 17 years: United States, 1999- 
2019. NCHS Data Brief. 2021;413. 
Fig. 2.
)
0.0
2000200220042006
Male1,2Female3Total2
200820102012201420162018
0.51.01.5
Deaths per 100,000 population
2.0
2.5
Fig 88.2
 Unintentional drowning death rates among children age 0- 
17 years, by sex: United States, 1999–2019. 
1
Rates significantly higher 
than those for females over the study period, 
p
 < 0.05. 
2
Significant de
-
creasing trend from 1999 through 2019, with different rates of change 
over time, 
p
 < 0.05. 
3
Significant decreasing trend from 1999 through 
2014; stable trend from 2014 through 2019, 
p
 < 0.05. Notes: Uninten
-
tional drowning deaths are identified using 
International Classification 
of Diseases, 10th Revision
 underlying cause- of- death codes W65–W74 
Accidental drowning and submersion. Drowning deaths totaled 756 
in 2019 among children age 0- 17 years. Rates shown are crude rates 
(deaths per 100,000). Source: National Center for Health Statistics, Na
-
tional Vital Statistics System, Mortality. 
(From Spencer MR, Hedegaard 
H, Warner M. Unintentional drowning deaths among children aged 0- 
17 years: United States, 1999- 2019. NCHS Data Brief. 2021;413, 
Fig. 1.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

638 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
swimming or boating activities are important factors in drowning inju
-
ries in school- age children.
 
Adolescents
The second peak incidence in drowning death rates occurs in older 
adolescents, age 15- 19 years. Almost 90% drown in open water. In this 
age- group particularly, striking disparities in drowning deaths exist in 
gender and ethnicity. Drowning death is roughly twice as common for 
males when compared with females, but among adolescents, the rate is 
almost 10 times higher among males. The gender disparity may likely 
be related to males’ greater exposure to aquatic environments, overesti
-
mation of swimming ability, underestimation of dangerous situations, 
increased risk- taking behavior, and greater alcohol use.
Dangerous underwater breath- holding behaviors (DUBBs)
 are 
often performed by experienced healthy swimmers or fitness enthusi
-
asts (hypoxic training) or when teenagers hold breath- holding contests 
during horseplay. DUBBs have been primarily reported in regulated 
swimming facilities. Behaviors include intentional hyperventilation 
before submersion, static apnea, and extended periods of underwater 
distance swimming or breath- hold intervals.
 
Ethnic Disparities
There is significant ethnic disparity seen across drowning rates and 
causes. Among children age 0- 19 years, the drowning rates from 2014 
to 2018 are highest among Black (1.79 per 100,000) and Indigenous 
Nations people and Alaska Native (1.49 per 100,000) individuals. Rates 
are lower among White (1.06 per 100,000), Asian American and Pacific 
Islander (0.85 per 100,000), and Hispanic (0.82 per 100,000) individu
-
als. Age dramatically influences drowning disparities. Black children 
drown at significantly higher rates than those for White and Hispanic 
children at every age from 5 to 18 years. Black children are more likely 
to drown in unguarded public pools, apartment pools, or hotel pools; 
White children are more likely to drown in private residential pools. 
Reasons for disparities in drowning rates may include cultural atti
-
tudes toward swimming, prohibitive cost and location of swimming 
lessons, fears about swimming, and lack of lifeguards at pools in many 
communities.
 
Underlying Conditions
Several underlying medical conditions are associated with drowning 
at all ages. 
Epilepsy
 is a known risk factor in drowning, with a relative 
risk for fatal and nonfatal drowning 7.5-  to 10- fold higher than chil
-
dren without seizures. Drowning is the most common cause of death 
from unintentional injury for people with epilepsy. 
Cardiac etiologies
, 
including	arrhythmias,	myocarditis,	and	prolonged	QT	or	catechol
-
aminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia syndromes, have been 
found in some children who die suddenly in the water, particularly in 
those with a family history of syncope, cardiac arrest, prior drowning, 
or	QT	prolongation.	Exertion	and	fright	while	swimming	can	trigger	
arrhythmia	among	individuals	with	long	QT	and	should	be	consid
-
ered a possible cause for unexplained submersion injuries, particularly 
among proficient swimmers in low- risk settings (see 
Chapter 484.5
).
Children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are at a significantly 
higher risk of drowning when compared with the general population; 
wandering was the most reported behavior leading to drowning in chil
-
dren with ASD. Children with muscle disease or peripheral neuropathies 
have an increased risk for drowning because of the degree of fatigability.
Drowning may also be an 
intentional injury
. A history of the event 
that changes or is inconsistent with the child’s developmental stage is 
the key to recognition of intentional drowning. Physical examination 
and other physical injuries rarely provide clues. 
Child abuse
 is more 
often recognized in bathtub- related drownings. 
Suicide
 usually occurs 
in lone swimmers in open water.
 
Alcohol Use
The use of alcohol and drugs greatly increases the risk of drowning. 
A meta- analysis found that 30–70% of swimming and boating fatal 
drowning victims have a measurable blood alcohol concentration. 
Alcohol can impair judgment, leading to riskier behavior, decreased 
balance and coordination, hypothermia, and blunted ability to self- 
rescue. Alcohol use while boating is also associated with low life jacket 
use. Furthermore, an intoxicated adult may provide less effective 
supervision of children around water.
 
Sports and Recreation
Most U.S. drowning deaths occur during recreational activities. 
Drowning is the leading cause of 
noncardiac sports- related deaths
. Sur
-
veys confirm that not using a personal flotation device (PFD) is com
-
mon during boating activities. In 2021 the U.S. Coast Guard reported 
that 83% of those who drowned in boating accidents were not wearing 
a PFD.
 
Global Impact of Drowning
Drowning injury is the third leading cause of unintentional death 
worldwide, with the majority (90%) of fatalities occurring in low-  
and middle- income countries. More than half of the global drowning 
occurs in the WHO Western Pacific and Southeast Asia regions. Global 
drowning rates are vastly underestimated, because many drowning 
deaths in this region go unreported, and many immediate fatalities are 
unrecognized. In addition, these data exclude any cases of drowning 
as the result of intentional harm or assault, accidents of watercraft or 
water transport, and drowning related to forces of nature or cataclys
-
mic storms, which usually claim large numbers of lives per incident; 
thus true numbers of fatal drowning are likely much higher.
Some patterns of pediatric drowning are similar in all countries. By 
most accounts, the highest rates are seen in males and in children 1- 4 
years old. The predominant locations are near or around the home, 
involving bodies of water used for activities of daily living. These 
include water- collecting systems, ponds, ditches, creeks, and watering 
holes. In tropical areas, death rates increase during monsoon season, 
when ditches and holes rapidly fill with rain, and are highest during 
daylight hours, when caregivers are busy with daily chores.
Drowning during natural disasters such as 
storms
 and 
floods
 is 
important in all areas of the world. The largest numbers of reported 
flood- related deaths occur in developing nations; most are drownings 
that occur during the storm surge. In the United States and much of 
Europe, advances in weather monitoring and warning systems have 
reduced such deaths. U.S. flooding incidents, including hurricanes 
Katrina and Sandy, showed that drowning caused the most deaths, par
-
ticularly when people became trapped in their vehicles, were unable or 
refused to evacuate homes, or attempted to rescue others.
 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Drowning victims drown quickly and quietly and do not signal distress 
or call for help. Vocalization is precluded by efforts to achieve maximal 
lung volume to keep the head above the water or by aspiration lead
-
ing to laryngospasm (
Fig. 88.3
). Young children can struggle for only 
10- 20 seconds and adolescents for 30- 60 seconds before final submer
-
sion. The 
instinctive drowning response
 is a phenomenon where actual 
or perceived suffocation in water triggers autonomic nervous system 
responses resulting in unlearned, instinctive drowning movements. A 
swimmer in distress is vertical in the water, with arms extended to the 
side to lift the body up and bring the mouth above water to breathe. 
This splashing or efforts to breathe are often misconstrued by nearby 
persons as merely playing in the water, until the victim sinks.
Anoxic- Ischemic Injury
During drowning there is a period of voluntary breath- holding, 
typically less than 1 minute, before small amounts of water enter the 
hypopharynx, triggering laryngospasm as a protective reflex. There 
is a progressive decrease in arterial blood oxyhemoglobin satura
-
tion (Sa
o
2
), and the person soon loses consciousness from hypoxia. 
Profound hypoxia and medullary depression lead to terminal apnea. 
Laryngospasm resolves, allowing additional fluid (water, stomach con
-
tents) into the lungs. At the same time, the cardiovascular response 
progresses to decreasing cardiac output and oxygen delivery to other 
organs. By 3- 4 minutes, myocardial hypoxia leads to peripheral 
vasoconstriction, decreased cardiac output, and abrupt circulatory 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88
 u 
Drowning and  Submersion Injury 
639
failure. Cardiac arrhythmias progress from tachycardia, to bradycar
-
dia, followed by ineffective cardiac contractions with electrical activity 
(pulseless electrical activity)
. With early initiation of CPR, spontane
-
ous circulation may initially be successfully restored. The extent of the 
global 
hypoxic- ischemic injury
 determines the outcome and becomes 
more evident over subsequent hours.
With modern intensive care, the cardiorespiratory effects of resus
-
citated drowning victims are usually manageable and are less often 
the cause of death than irreversible hypoxic- ischemic central nervous 
system (CNS) injury (see 
Chapter 82
). CNS injury is the most com
-
mon cause of mortality and long- term morbidity. Although the dura
-
tion of anoxia before irreversible CNS injury begins is uncertain, it 
is probably on the order of 3- 5 minutes. Submersion <5 minutes is 
associated with a favorable prognosis, whereas those >25 minutes are 
generally fatal.
Several hours after cardiopulmonary arrest, 
cerebral edema
 may 
occur, although the mechanism is not entirely clear. Severe cerebral 
edema can elevate intracranial pressure (ICP), contributing to further 
ischemia; intracranial hypertension is an ominous sign of profound 
CNS damage.
All other organs and tissues may exhibit signs of hypoxic- ischemic 
injury. In the lung, damage to the pulmonary vascular endothelium 
can lead to 
acute respiratory distress syndrome
 (ARDS; see 
Chap
-
ter 86
). Aspiration may also compound pulmonary injury. Myocardial 
dysfunction, arterial hypotension, decreased cardiac output, arrhyth
-
mias, and cardiac infarction may also occur. Acute kidney injury, cor
-
tical necrosis, and renal failure are common complications of major 
hypoxic- ischemic events (see 
Chapter 572.1
). Vascular endothelial 
injury may initiate disseminated intravascular coagulation, hemoly
-
sis, and thrombocytopenia. Many factors contribute to gastrointesti
-
nal damage; bloody diarrhea with mucosal sloughing may be seen and 
often portends a fatal injury. Serum levels of hepatic transaminases and 
pancreatic enzymes are often acutely increased. Violation of normal 
mucosal protective barriers predisposes the victim to bacteremia and 
sepsis.
 
Pulmonary Injury
Pulmonary aspiration occurs in many drowning victims, but the 
amount of aspirated fluid is usually small (see 
Chapter 446
). Aspi
-
rated water does not obstruct airways and is readily moved into the 
Fig. 88.3
 Pathophysiologic events of the drowning process. LQTS, Long QT syndrome; CPVT, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycar
-
dia; HIE, hypoxic- ischemic encephalopathy; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome. 
(
Courtesy Andrew Schmidt, DO, MPH.
)
GaspInvoluntary inhalation due to hypercapniaBreath-holdingVictim actively protects airwayStruggleVictim attempts to resurfaceFright+LQTS+CPVT
No laryngospasmWater may freely enter airwayLaryngospasmPhysiologic airway closuredue to fluid inhalationLaryngospasm may relaxwith loss of consciousnessAspirationFresh water
Hypo-osmolar water leaks tocapillary bed and circulationSalt water
Hyperosmolar water drawsplasma fluid into alveoliRespiratory failureSecondary to ARDSSurvival ±HIE or death
CardiopulmonaryarrestSubmersionVictim’s airway falls below level of fluid
Fatal cardiacarrhythmias
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

640 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
pulmonary circulation with positive pressure ventilation. More 
importantly, it can wash out surfactant and cause alveolar instability, 
ventilation- perfusion mismatch, and intrapulmonary shunting. The 
disruption of the alveolar capillary membrane leads to alveolar edema 
resulting in local ARDS- like syndrome.
In humans, aspiration of small amounts (1- 3 mL/kg) can lead to 
marked hypoxemia and a 10–40% reduction in lung compliance. The 
composition of aspirated material can also affect the patient’s clinical 
course: gastric contents, oropharyngeal flora, pathogenic organisms, 
toxic chemicals, and other foreign matter can injure the lung or cause air
-
way obstruction. Aspiration is typically considered the source of pneu
-
monia in cases of drowning, and antibiotics should be initiated based 
on radiographic evidence and clinical suspicion; no mortality benefit 
has been shown in those patients who received empiric or prophylactic 
antimicrobial therapy. Clinical management is not significantly differ
-
ent in saltwater and freshwater aspirations, because most victims do not 
aspirate enough fluid volume to make a clinical difference.
 
Cold Water Injury
Drowning should be differentiated from cold water 
immersion
 inju
-
ries, in which the victim remains afloat, keeping the head above water 
without respiratory impairment in cold waters. The definition of cold 
water varies from <15–20°C (<59–68°F).
Heat loss through conduction and convection is more efficient 
in water than in air. Children are at increased risk for 
hypothermia
 
because of their relatively high ratio of body surface area (BSA) to 
mass, decreased subcutaneous fat, and limited thermogenic capacity. 
Body temperature may also continue to fall after removal from the 
water because of cold air, wet clothes, hypoxia, and hospital transport 
time. Hypothermia in pediatric drowning victims may be observed 
even after drowning in relatively warm water and in warm climates 
(see 
Chapter 90
).
Immersion in cold water has immediate respiratory and cardiovas
-
cular effects. Victims experience 
cold water shock
, a dynamic series 
of cardiorespiratory physiologic responses that can cause drowning. 
In adults, immersion in icy water results in intense involuntary reflex 
hyperventilation and a decrease in breath- holding ability to <10 sec
-
onds, which leads to fluid aspiration. Severe bradycardia, the 
diving 
reflex,
 occurs in adults but is transient and rapidly followed by supra
-
ventricular and ectopic tachycardia and hypertension. There is 
no evi
-
dence
 that the diving reflex has any protective effect.
Even after surviving the chaotic minutes of cold- water shock, after 
an additional 5- 10 minutes of cold- water immersion, the victim can 
become incapacitated. Cooling of large and small muscles disables the 
victim’s ability to grab hold, swim, or perform other self- rescue maneu
-
vers. Severe hypothermia with body temperatures below 28°C (82.4°F) 
can lead to cardiac arrhythmia and asystole.
Depending on water and air temperature, insulation, BSA, ther
-
mogenic capacity, physical condition, swimming efforts, or high- 
water flow rates, heat loss with continued immersion can significantly 
decrease core temperature to hypothermic levels within 30- 60 minutes.
The symptoms and severity of hypothermia are categorized based on 
body temperature. The victim with mild hypothermia has a core body 
temperature of 32–35°C (90–95°F) with intact thermogenic mecha
-
nisms (shivering and nonshivering thermogenesis, vasoconstriction) 
and active movements. Compensatory mechanisms usually attempt 
to restore normothermia at body temperatures >32°C (89.6°F). Lower 
core temperatures lead to impaired cognition, coordination, and mus
-
cle strength and, with it, less ability to self- rescue. Thermoregulation 
may fail, and spontaneous rewarming will not occur. With moderate 
hypothermia (28 to <32°C [82 to <90°F]), loss of consciousness leads 
to water aspiration. Progressive bradycardia, impaired myocardial con
-
tractility, and loss of vasomotor tone contribute to inadequate perfu
-
sion, hypotension, and possible shock. At body temperatures <28°C 
(82.4°F), extreme bradycardia is usually present with decreases in 
cardiac output, and the propensity for spontaneous ventricular fibril
-
lation or asystole is high. Central respiratory center depression with 
moderate to severe hypothermia results in hypoventilation and even
-
tual apnea. A deep coma, with fixed and dilated pupils and absence of 
reflexes at very low body temperatures (<25–29°C [77–84.2°F]), may 
give the false appearance of death.
If	the	cooling	process	is	quick—and	cardiac	output	lasts	long	enough	
for	sufficient	heat	loss	to	occur	before	the	onset	of	severe	hypoxia—the	
brain can cool to a level that may be considered in the 
neuroprotec
-
tive
 range, approximately 33°C (91.4°F) in controlled, experimental 
conditions. However, if submersion leading to drowning occurs before 
development of a neuroprotective level of hypothermia, severe anoxia 
devastates tissue organs. The theoretical benefits, implications, and 
consequences of hypothermia in drowning victims are areas of con
-
troversy. Known adverse effects are associated with hypothermia, 
and these must be balanced against the potential benefits observed in 
experimental data. One should clearly differentiate among 
controlled 
hypothermia
, such as that used in the operating room before the onset 
of hypoxia or ischemia; 
accidental hypothermia
, such as occurs in 
drowning, which is uncontrolled and variable, with onset during or 
shortly after hypoxia- ischemia; and 
therapeutic hypothermia
, involv
-
ing the purposeful and controlled lowering and maintenance of body 
(or brain) temperature after a hypoxic- ischemic event.
In drowning victims with uncontrolled accidental hypothermia 
associated with icy water submersion, there are isolated and rare 
reports of good neurologic recovery after prolonged (10- 150 minutes) 
cardiopulmonary arrest. Almost all these rare survivors have been in 
freezing water (<5°C [41°F]) and had core body temperatures <30°C 
(86°F), often much lower. Presumably, very rapid and sufficiently deep 
hypothermia developed in these fortunate survivors before irrevers
-
ible hypoxic- ischemic injury occurred. Intact neurologic functioning 
after sustaining a severe hypothermic submersion is likely associated 
with a combination of variables, including submersion times (most 
important), water temperature, immediate resuscitation, quality and 
duration of resuscitation, idioventricular bradycardia, and rewarming 
speed.
Most often, hypothermia is a poor prognostic sign, and a neuro
-
protective effect has not universally been demonstrated. A 2014 study 
from Washington State found that submersion duration <6 minutes 
is most strongly related to good outcome, not water temperature. In 
another study of comatose drowning patients admitted to the pediatric 
intensive care unit (PICU), 65% of hypothermic patients (body tem
-
perature <35°C [95°F]) died, compared with a 27% observed mortality 
rate in nonhypothermic victims. Thus a beneficial effect of drowning- 
associated hypothermia has not been seen in most pediatric submer
-
sion victims.
 
MANAGEMENT
Duration of submersion, speed of the rescue, effectiveness of resuscita
-
tive efforts, and clinical course determine the outcome in submersion 
victims (
Fig. 88.4
).	Two	groups	may	be	identified	based	on	respon
-
siveness at the scene. The first group consists of children who require 
minimal resuscitation at the scene and quickly regain spontaneous res
-
piration and consciousness. They have good outcomes and minimal 
complications. In awake, alert victims with hypoxemia, the first line of 
therapy is supplemental oxygen. These victims should be transported 
from the scene to the ED for further evaluation and observation. The 
second group comprises children in cardiac arrest who require aggres
-
sive or prolonged resuscitation and have a high risk of multiple organ 
system complications, major neurologic morbidity, or death. Com
-
pared with cardiac arrest from other causes, cardiac arrest from drown
-
ing has a higher survival rate.
Initial management of drowning victims requires coordinated and 
experienced prehospital care following the ABCs (airway, breathing, 
circulation) of emergency resuscitation. CPR of drowning victims must 
include providing adequate ventilation as the initial phase of respira
-
tory arrest, as these children may still have intact circulation. However, 
this phase will progress to cardiac arrest if hypoxia persists. Children 
with severe hypoxic injury and symptoms often remain comatose and 
lack brainstem reflexes despite the restoration of oxygenation and cir
-
culation. Subsequent ED and PICU care often involve advanced life 
support (ALS) strategies and management of multiorgan dysfunction 
with discussions about end- of- life care.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88
 u 
Drowning and  Submersion Injury 
641
Initial Evaluation and Resuscitation
See 
Chapter 79
.
Immediate resuscitation at the submersion site, even before arrival 
of emergency medical services (EMS) personnel, is the most effective 
method to improve outcomes after drowning. Neurologic prognosis 
is significantly improved by prompt bystander CPR and activation of 
prehospital ALS. The goal is to reverse the anoxia from submersion 
and limit secondary hypoxic injury after submersion. Every minute 
that passes without the reestablishment of adequate breathing and 
circulation dramatically decreases the possibility of a good outcome. 
When safe for the victim and the rescuer, institution of in- water resus
-
citation for nonbreathing victims by trained personnel may improve 
the likelihood of survival. In- water resuscitation protocols recommend 
performing up to 1 minute of ventilation before attempting to bring the 
unconscious and apneic patient to shore. For patients in deep water, 
in- water resuscitation requires rescue flotation equipment or at least 
2 rescuers. Practically, victims usually need to be extricated from the 
water as quickly as possible so that effective CPR can be provided.
Initial resuscitation must focus on rapidly restoring oxygenation, 
ventilation, and adequate circulation. The airway should be clear of 
vomitus and foreign material, which may cause obstruction or aspira
-
tion. Abdominal thrusts 
should not
 be used for fluid removal, because 
many victims have a distended abdomen from swallowed water; 
abdominal thrusts may increase the risk of regurgitation and aspira
-
tion. In cases of suspected airway foreign body, chest compressions or 
back blows are preferable maneuvers.
The cervical spine (C- spine) should be protected in anyone with poten
-
tial traumatic neck injury
 (see Chapters 80 and 81
). Cervical spine 
injury is a rare concomitant injury in drowning; approximately 0.5% of 
submersion victims have C- spine injuries, and history of the event and 
victim’s age should guide suspicion of C- spine injury. Drowning victims 
with C- spine injury are usually preteens or teenagers whose drowning 
event involved diving, a motor vehicle crash, a fall from a height, a 
water sport accident, child abuse, or other clinical signs of serious trau
-
matic injury. In such cases, the neck should be maintained in a neu
-
tral position and protected with a well- fitting cervical collar. Patients 
Grade 6Check for response to verbal andtactile stimuliNo answerAnswerOpen the airway and check for ventilation;if breathing, perform pulmonary auscultation;if not breathing, give 5 initial breathsand check carotid pulsePerform pulmonary auscultationPulse absentPulse present5669%AbnormalNormalDeadGrade 5Grade 4EmergencydepartmentIf no coexisting conditions, evaluatefurther or release from the accident siteMonitor breathingbecause respiratoryarrest can stilloccur; startcrystalloid infusionand evaluate foruse of vasopressorsGrade 37882%9596%99%100%100%Hypotensionor shockNormal bloodpressureGrade 2Grade 1RescueStart artificialventilation;respiratory arrestis usuallyreversed after afew imposedbreaths; afterreturn ofspontaneousventilation, followinterventionfor grade 4Administer high-flow oxygen by facemask or orotracheal tube andmechanical ventilationStart CPR(ABC sequence);after return ofspontaneousventilation,follow interventionfor grade 4None712%0%Intensive care unitForensicevaluationLow-flow oxygenAdvanced medicalattention andoxygen shouldnot be requiredNoneSubmersion timelessequal1 hr, no obviousphysical evidenceof death Submersion time>1 hr or obviousphysical evidenceof deathWith coughWithout coughRales in somepulmonary fieldsRales in all pulmonary fields(acute pulmonary edema)EvaluationGradeFurtherManagementSurvivalIntervention
Fig. 88.4
 Treatment of persons who have drowned, with classification system. 
(
From Szpilman D, Bierens J, Handley A, Orloweski J. Drowning. 
N Engl J Med
 
2012;366:2102–2110. 
Fig. 1.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

642 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
rescued from unknown circumstances may also warrant C- spine pre
-
cautions. In low- impact submersions, spinal injuries are exceedingly 
rare, and routine spinal immobilization is not warranted.
If the victim has ineffective respirations or apnea, ventilatory support 
must be initiated immediately. Mouth- to- mouth or mouth- to- nose 
breathing by trained bystanders often restores spontaneous ventila
-
tion. As soon as it is available, supplemental oxygen should be admin
-
istered to all victims. Positive pressure bag- mask ventilation with 100% 
inspired oxygen should be instituted in patients with respiratory insuf
-
ficiency. If apnea, cyanosis, hypoventilation, or labored respiration 
persists, trained personnel should perform endotracheal intubation 
as soon as possible. Intubation is also indicated to protect the airway 
in patients with depressed mental status or hemodynamic instability. 
Hypoxia must be corrected rapidly to optimize the chance of recovery.
Concurrent with securing of airway control, oxygenation, and ven
-
tilation, the child’s cardiovascular status must be evaluated and treated 
according to the usual resuscitation guidelines and protocols. Heart 
rate and rhythm, blood pressure, temperature, and end- organ perfu
-
sion require urgent assessment. CPR should be instituted immediately 
in pulseless, bradycardic, or severely hypotensive victims, as studies 
have shown receiving bystander CPR is associated with neurologically 
favorable survival in all age groups. Continuous monitoring of the elec
-
trocardiogram (ECG) allows appropriate diagnosis and treatment of 
arrhythmias. Slow capillary refill, cool extremities, and altered mental 
status are potential indicators of shock (see 
Chapter 85
).
Recognition and treatment of hypothermia are unique aspects of 
cardiac resuscitation in the drowning victim. Core temperature must 
be evaluated, especially in children, because moderate to severe hypo
-
thermia can depress myocardial function and cause arrhythmias. Wet 
clothing should be removed to prevent ongoing heat losses, although 
in the hemodynamically stable patient, rewarming should be initiated 
in the controlled environment of the receiving ED or PICU. Unstable 
patients (i.e., arrhythmias) should be warmed to 34°C (93.2°F), taking 
care not to overheat (see 
Chapter 90, Fig. 90.2
).
Often, intravenous (IV) fluids and vasoactive medications are 
required to improve circulation and perfusion. Vascular access should 
be established as quickly as possible for the administration of fluids or 
pressors. Intraosseous catheter placement is a potentially lifesaving vas
-
cular access technique that avoids the delay usually associated with mul
-
tiple attempts to establish IV access in critically ill children. Epinephrine 
is the initial drug of choice in victims with brady- asystolic cardiopul
-
monary arrest (IV dose is 0.01 mg/kg using the 1:10,000 [0.1 mg/mL] 
solution given every 3- 5 minutes, as needed). Epinephrine can be given 
intratracheally (endotracheal tube dose is 0.1- 0.2 mg/kg of 1:1,000 [1 
mg/mL] solution) if no IV access is available. An intravascular bolus of 
lactated Ringer solution or 0.9% normal saline (10- 20 mL/kg) is often 
used to augment preload; repeated doses may be necessary
.
 
Hospital- Based Evaluation and Treatment
Most pediatric drowning victims should be observed for at least 4- 6 
hours, even if they are asymptomatic on presentation to the ED. Serial 
monitoring of vital signs and oxygenation by pulse oximetry, repeated 
pulmonary examination, and neurologic assessment should be per
-
formed in all drowning victims. Additional studies may also be war
-
ranted, depending on the specific circumstances (possible abuse or 
neglect, traumatic injuries, or suspected intoxication). Almost half of 
asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic alert children (who did not 
require ALS in the prehospital setting or who have an initial ED Glasgow 
Coma Scale [GCS] score of 
≥
13) experience some level of respiratory dis
-
tress or hypoxemia progressing to pulmonary edema during the initial 
4- 6 hours after submersion. Most alert children with early respiratory 
symptoms respond to oxygen and, despite abnormal initial radiographs, 
become asymptomatic with a return of normal room- air pulse oxim
-
etry oxyhemoglobin saturation (Sp
o
2
) and pulmonary examination by 
4- 6 hours. Subsequent delayed respiratory deterioration is extremely 
unlikely in such children. Low- risk patients who present with normal 
mental status and normal respiratory function may be considered for 
discharge after 4- 6 hours of observation if there is no deterioration of 
respiratory symptoms and appropriate follow- up can be ensured.
Initial ED management of symptomatic patients with respiratory 
distress or lethargy may require further testing depending on clinical 
severity. Initial studies may include blood gas monitoring, a complete 
metabolic	panel,	a	complete	blood	count,	and	chest	radiography.	Toxi
-
cology tests, including drug and alcohol levels, should be considered 
when appropriate.
There has been much misinformation about 
dry drowning
 and 
secondary drowning
. These are misnomers and not accepted medical 
terms. Dry drowning has been described historically as cases in which 
no water was found in the lungs at autopsy. Secondary drowning has 
been used interchangeably to describe patients who clinically worsen 
due to pulmonary edema after aspiration of water. These terms cause 
harm by misdiagnosing cases of sudden death as drowning when there 
is an alternative diagnosis. They also cause confusion when describ
-
ing and monitoring drowning events. Drowning victims with no or 
minimal clinical signs of distress will either improve or worsen within 
4–6 hours, and patients will not unexpectedly die of drowning days or 
weeks later without preceding signs.
Cardiorespiratory Management
For children who are not in cardiac arrest, the level of respiratory sup
-
port should be appropriate to the patient’s condition and is a continua
-
tion of prehospital management. Frequent assessments are required to 
ensure that adequate oxygenation, ventilation, and airway control are 
maintained (see 
Chapter 86
). Hypercapnia should generally be avoided 
in potentially brain- injured children. Patients with altered mental sta
-
tus, actual or potential hypoventilation, or markedly elevated work of 
breathing should receive mechanical ventilation to avoid hypercapnia 
and decrease the energy expenditures of labored respiration. Noninva
-
sive ventilation (NIV) strategies such as bilevel positive airway pressure 
(BiPAP) and high- flow nasal canula (HFNC) have been associated with 
rapid improvement in the early phase of oxygenation in patients with
-
out altered mental status to reduce mortality.
Measures to stabilize cardiovascular status should also continue. 
Conditions contributing to myocardial insufficiency include hypoxic- 
ischemic injury, hypoxia, hypothermia, acidosis, high airway pressures 
during mechanical ventilation, alterations of intravascular volume, 
and electrolyte disorders. Heart failure, shock, arrhythmias, or cardiac 
arrest may occur. Continuous ECG monitoring is mandatory for rec
-
ognition and treatment of arrhythmias (see 
Chapter 484
).
The provision of adequate oxygenation and ventilation is a prerequi
-
site to improving myocardial function. Patients should be given 100% 
inspired oxygen until oxygen saturation can be reasonably measured. 
Fluid resuscitation and inotropic agents are often necessary to improve 
heart function and restore tissue perfusion (see 
Chapter 79
). Increas
-
ing preload with IV fluids may be beneficial through improvements in 
stroke volume and cardiac output. Overzealous fluid administration, 
however, especially in the presence of poor myocardial function, can 
worsen pulmonary edema.
For patients with persistent cardiopulmonary arrest on arrival in 
the ED after 
non–icy water
 drowning, the decision to withhold or stop 
resuscitative efforts can be addressed by review of the history and the 
response to treatment. Because there are reports of good outcome after 
ongoing CPR in the ED, most drowning victims should be treated 
aggressively on presentation. However, for children who do not show 
ready response to aggressive resuscitative efforts, the need for prolonged 
ongoing CPR after non–icy water submersion almost invariably predicts 
death or persistent vegetative state. Consequently, in most cases, discon
-
tinuation of CPR in the ED is probably warranted for victims of non–
icy water submersion who do not respond to resuscitation within 25- 30 
minutes. Final decisions regarding whether and when to discontinue 
resuscitative efforts must be individualized, with the understanding that 
the possibility of good outcome is generally very low with protracted 
resuscitation efforts. In circumstances of severe ARDS or cardiac insuf
-
ficiency, extracorporeal life support has been successfully employed.
 
Neurologic Management
Drowning victims who present to the hospital awake and alert usually 
have normal neurologic outcomes. In comatose victims, irreversible 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88
 u 
Drowning and  Submersion Injury 
643
CNS injury is highly likely. The most critical and effective neurologic 
intensive care measures after drowning are rapid restoration and main
-
tenance of adequate oxygenation, ventilation, and perfusion. Core 
body temperature and glucose management are important modulators 
of neurologic injury after hypoxia- ischemia.
Comatose drowning patients are at risk for intracranial hyperten
-
sion. There is little evidence that ICP monitoring and therapy to reduce 
intracranial hypertension improve outcomes for drowning victims. 
Patients	with	elevated	ICP	usually	have	poor	outcomes—either	death	
or persistent vegetative state. Children with normal ICP can also have 
poor outcomes, although less frequently. Conventional neurologic 
intensive care therapies, such as fluid restriction; hyperventilation; and 
administration of muscle relaxants, osmotic agents, diuretics, barbitu
-
rates, and corticosteroids, have not been shown to benefit the drowning 
victim, either individually or in combination. There is some evidence 
that these therapies may reduce overall mortality but increase the num
-
ber of survivors with severe neurologic morbidity.
Seizures after hypoxic brain injury are common, although detec
-
tion is often difficult in the ICU because these patients are frequently 
sedated. Continuous electroencephalographic (EEG) monitoring 
in critically ill patients revealed a 13% incidence of seizures, 92% of 
which were exclusively nonconvulsive. However, EEG monitoring has 
only limited value in the management of drowning victims, except to 
detect seizures or as an adjunct in the clinical evaluation of brain death 
(see 
Chapter 83
). Seizures should be treated, if possible, to stabilize 
cerebral oxygen use, although benefits are inconclusive. Fosphenytoin 
or phenytoin (loading dose of 10- 20 mg of phenytoin equivalents/kg, 
followed by maintenance dosing with 5- 8 mg of phenytoin equivalents/
kg/day in two or three divided doses
; levels should be monitored) may 
be considered as an anticonvulsant; it may have some neuroprotective 
effects and may mitigate neurogenic pulmonary edema. Benzodiaz
-
epines, barbiturates, and other anticonvulsants may also have some 
role in seizure therapy, although no conclusive studies have shown 
improved neurologic outcome.
With optimal management, many initially comatose children can 
have impressive neurologic improvement, but usually do so within the 
first 24- 72 hours. Unfortunately, half of deeply comatose drowning vic
-
tims admitted to the PICU die of their hypoxic brain injury or survive 
with severe neurologic damage. Deeply comatose drowning victims 
who do not show substantial improvement on neurologic examina
-
tion after 24- 72 hours and whose coma cannot be otherwise explained 
should be seriously considered for limitation or withdrawal of support.
 
Additional Management Issues
Many drowning victims may have traumatic injury (see 
Chapter 80
), 
especially if their drowning event involved participation in high- energy 
water sports such as personal watercraft, boating, diving, or surfing. A 
high index of suspicion for such injury is required. 
Spinal precautions 
should be maintained in victims with altered mental status and suspected 
traumatic injury.
Hypoxic- ischemic injury can have multiple systemic effects, 
although protracted organ dysfunction is uncommon in the absence of 
severe CNS injury. Hyperglycemia is associated with a poor outcome 
in critically ill pediatric drowning victims. Glucose control in patients 
after drowning should be focused on avoiding hypoglycemia, hyper
-
glycemia, and wide or rapid fluctuations in serum glucose to prevent 
further harm.
Manifestations of acute kidney injury may be seen after hypoxic- 
ischemic injury (see 
Chapter 572
). Diuretics, fluid restriction, and 
dialysis are occasionally needed to treat fluid overload or electrolyte 
disturbances; renal function usually normalizes in survivors. Rhabdo
-
myolysis after drowning has been reported.
Profuse bloody diarrhea and mucosal sloughing usually portend a 
grim prognosis; conservative management includes bowel rest, naso
-
gastric suction, and gastric pH neutralization. Nutritional support for 
most drowning victims is usually not difficult, because most children 
either die or recover quickly and resume a normal diet within a few 
days. Enteral tube feeding or parenteral nutrition is occasionally indi
-
cated in children who do not recover quickly.
Hyperthermia after drowning or other types of brain injury may 
increase the risk of mortality and exacerbate hypoxic- ischemic CNS dam
-
age.
 Almost half of drowning victims have a fever during the first 48 
hours after submersion. Hyperthermia is usually not caused by infec
-
tion and resolves without antibiotics in approximately 80% of patients. 
Generally, prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended. However, 
there is general consensus that fever or hyperthermia (core body tem
-
perature >37.5°C [99.5°F]) in comatose drowning victims resuscitated 
from cardiac arrest should be prevented at all times in the acute recov
-
ery period (at least the first 24- 48 hours).
Psychiatric and psychosocial sequelae
 in the family of a pediatric 
drowning victim are common. Grief, guilt, and anger are typical among 
family members, including siblings. Divorce rates increase within a few 
years of the injury, and parents often report difficulties with employ
-
ment or substance abuse. Friends and family may blame the parents for 
the event. Professional counseling, pastoral care, or social work referral 
should be initiated for drowning victims and their families.
 
Hypothermia Management
Attention to core body temperature starts in the field and continues dur
-
ing transport and in the hospital. The goal is to prevent or treat moder
-
ate or severe hypothermia. Damp clothing should be removed from all 
drowning victims. Rewarming measures are generally categorized as pas
-
sive, active external, or active internal (see 
Chapter 90
). 
Passive rewarm
-
ing measures
 can be applied in the prehospital or hospital setting and 
include the provision of dry blankets, a warm environment, and protec
-
tion from further heat loss. These should be instituted as soon as possible 
for hypothermic drowning victims who have not had a cardiac arrest.
Full CPR with chest compressions is indicated for hypothermic vic
-
tims if no pulse can be found or if narrow complex QRS activity is 
absent on ECG (see Chapters 79 and 90
)
. When core body temperature 
is <30°C (86°F), resuscitative efforts should proceed according to the 
American Heart Association guidelines for CPR, but IV medications 
may be given at a lower frequency in moderate hypothermia because 
of decreased drug clearance. When ventricular fibrillation is present in 
severely hypothermic victims (core temperature <30°C [86°F]), defi
-
brillation should be initiated, but may not be effective until the core 
temperature is 
≥
30°C (86°F), at which time successful defibrillation 
may be more likely.
Significant controversy surrounds the discontinuation of prolonged 
resuscitative efforts in hypothermic drowning victims. Body temperature 
should be considered before resuscitative efforts are terminated. Other 
considerations include whether the victim may have been immersed 
before submerged, whether water was icy, or the cooling was very rapid 
with fast- flowing cold water. Victims with profound hypothermia may 
appear clinically dead, but full neurologic recovery is possible, although 
rare. Attempts at lifesaving resuscitation should not be withheld based 
on initial clinical presentation unless the victim is obviously dead 
(dependent lividity or rigor mortis). Rewarming efforts should usually 
be continued until the temperature is 32–34°C (89.6–93.2°F); if the vic
-
tim continues to have no effective cardiac rhythm and remains unre
-
sponsive to aggressive CPR, resuscitative efforts can be discontinued.
Complete rewarming is not indicated for all arrest victims before 
resuscitative efforts are abandoned. Discontinuing resuscitation in 
victims of non–icy water submersion who remain asystolic despite 30 
minutes of CPR is probably warranted. Physicians must use their indi
-
vidual clinical judgment about deciding to stop resuscitative efforts, 
taking into account the unique circumstances of each incident.
Once a drowning victim has undergone successful CPR after a car
-
diac arrest, temperature management should be carefully considered 
and body temperature continuously monitored. In victims in whom 
resuscitation duration was brief and who are awake soon after resusci
-
tation, attempts to restore and maintain normothermia are warranted. 
Careful monitoring is necessary to prevent unrecognized worsening 
hypothermia, which can have untoward consequences.
For drowning victims who remain comatose after successful CPR, 
more contentious issues include rewarming of hypothermic patients 
and controlled application of therapeutic hypothermia. Although 
there is no evidence basis or opinion consensus, many investigators 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

644 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
cautiously recommend that hypothermic drowning victims who 
remain unresponsive because of hypoxic- ischemic encephalopathy 
after restoration of adequate spontaneous circulation should not be 
actively rewarmed to normal body temperatures. Active rewarm
-
ing should be limited to victims with core body temperatures <32°C 
(89.6°F), but temperatures 32–37.5°C (89.6–99.5°F) should be allowed 
without further rewarming efforts.
More controversial is the 
induction of therapeutic hypothermia
 in 
drowning victims who remain comatose because of hypoxic- ischemic 
encephalopathy after CPR for cardiac arrest. 
A specific recommendation 
for therapeutic hypothermia, especially in children, is not yet generally 
accepted.
	The	Advanced	Life	Support	Task	Force	of	the	International	
Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (2002) did not recommend 
therapeutic hypothermia in drowned children resuscitated after car
-
diopulmonary arrest, citing insufficient evidence and older studies 
demonstrating a potential deleterious effect in pediatric drowning vic
-
tims. Several subsequent studies evaluating extracorporeal membrane 
circulation, rewarming, and therapeutic hypothermia in pediatric and 
adult drowning patients have shown no significant improvement in 
neurologic outcome or mortality.
The Therapeutic Hypothermia After Out- of- Hospital Pediatric 
Cardiac	Arrest	(THAPCA)	randomized	controlled	trial	(RCT)	inves
-
tigators analyzed post hoc the findings of 
targeted temperature manage
-
ment
	(TTM)	in	pediatric	comatose	survivors	of	out-	of-	hospital	cardiac	
arrest caused by drowning. Drowning comprised 28% of the landmark 
pediatric	TTM	(33°C	vs	36.8°C)	RCT,	and	the	authors’	principal	obser
-
vation is that targeting hypothermia, compared with targeting normo
-
thermia, did not result in better survival.
 
PROGNOSIS
The outcomes for drowning victims are remarkably bimodal: The 
great majority of victims either have a good outcome (intact or mild 
neurologic sequelae) or a poor outcome (severe neurologic sequelae, 
persistent vegetative state, or death), with very few exhibiting interme
-
diate neurologic injury at hospital discharge. Subsequent evaluation of 
good- outcome survivors may identify significant persistent cognitive 
deficits. Of hospitalized pediatric drowning victims, 15% die and as 
many as 20% survive with severe permanent neurologic damage.
Strong predictors of outcome are based on the incident and response 
to treatment at the scene. Intact survival or mild neurologic impair
-
ment has been seen in 91% of children with submersion duration <5 
minutes and in 87% with resuscitation duration <10 minutes. Chil
-
dren with normal sinus rhythm, reactive pupils, or neurologic respon
-
siveness at the scene virtually always had good outcomes (99%). Poor 
outcome is highly likely in patients with deep coma, apnea, absence of 
pupil responses (fixed dilated pupils), and hyperglycemia in the ED; 
with submersion durations >10 minutes; and with failure of response 
to CPR given for 25 minutes. In one comprehensive case series, all 
children with resuscitation durations >25 minutes either died or had 
severe neurologic morbidity, and all victims with submersion dura
-
tions >25 minutes died. Long- term health- related quality of life and 
school performance in those who had received either bystander-  or 
emergency medical service personnel–initiated CPR were high if 
their submersion duration was <5 minutes. Higher morbidity, higher 
mortality, and lower quality of life were reported in patients with >10 
minutes submersion duration. In several studies of pediatric drown
-
ing, submersion duration was the best predictor of outcome and water 
temperature was not. However, there are rare case reports of intact 
recovery after non–icy water drowning with longer submersion or 
resuscitation duration.
The GCS score has some limited utility in predicting recovery. Chil
-
dren with a score 
≥
6 on hospital admission generally have a good out
-
come, whereas those with a score 
≤
5 have a much higher probability of 
poor neurologic outcome. Improvement in the GCS score during the 
first several hours of hospitalization may indicate a better prognosis. 
Overall, early GCS assessments fail to adequately distinguish children 
who will survive intact from those with major neurologic injury.
Neurologic examination and progression during the first 24- 72 hours 
are the best prognosticators of long- term CNS outcome. Children who 
regain consciousness within 48- 72 hours, even after prolonged resusci
-
tation, are unlikely to have serious neurologic sequelae. Laboratory and 
technologic methods to improve prognostication have not yet proved 
superior to neurologic examination. Serial neurologic evaluations after 
CPR should be performed over the ensuing 48- 72 hours, with consid
-
eration given to limitation or withdrawal of support in patients who do 
not have significant neurologic recovery, even though this may occur 
before absolute prognostic certainty is achieved. Patients with minimal 
improvement during this initial period rarely show significant subse
-
quent neurologic recovery despite aggressive resuscitation efforts and 
remain in a persistent vegetative state or die. Survivors with severe neu
-
rologic limitations necessitate neurorehabilitation to restore function 
and facilitate psychomotor development and prevent long- term dam
-
age caused by contractures, deformities, or scoliosis.
 
PREVENTION
The most effective way to decrease the injury burden of drowning is 
prevention. Drowning is a multifaceted problem, but several evidence- 
based preventive strategies are effective. The pediatrician has a prime 
opportunity to identify and inform families at risk of these strategies 
through anticipatory guidance. Advocacy should focus on anticipa
-
tory guidance regarding the appropriate supervision of children, access 
to swim lessons, presence of lifeguards, barriers to swimming pools, 
and use of PFDs. A family- centered approach to anticipatory guidance 
for water safety helps explore and identify the water hazards that each 
family is exposed to in their environment. The practitioner can then 
discuss the best tools and strategies for prevention that are relevant for 
the family. It is important to identify the risk both in and around the 
home and in other locations they may frequent, often when vacation
-
ing, such as vacation or relatives’ homes. If the family recreates near or 
on open water, they also need to learn about safety around boats and 
open water. In a rural environment, water collection systems and natu
-
ral bodies of water may pose great risk.
Parents must build layers of water protection around their children. 
Table	88.1
 provides an approach to the hazards and preventive strategies 
relevant to the most common sources of water involved in childhood 
drowning. A common preventive strategy for exposure to all water 
types and all ages is ensuring 
appropriate supervision
. Pediatricians 
should define for parents what constitutes appropriate supervision at 
the various developmental levels of childhood. Many parents either 
underestimate the importance of adequate supervision or are simply 
unaware of the risks associated with water. Even parents who say that 
constant supervision is necessary will often admit to brief lapses while 
their child is alone near water. Parents also overestimate the supervi
-
sory abilities of older siblings; many bathtub drownings occur when an 
infant or toddler is left with a child <5 years old.
Drowning most often occurs quickly and quietly during periods of 
inadequate supervision. Supervisory behavior is composed of three com
-
ponents: proximity, attention, and continuity. The caregiver must be alert, 
must not be consuming alcohol or other drugs or socializing, and must 
be attentive and focused entirely on watching the child. If the child can
-
not swim independently, 
touch supervision
 is required, meaning that the 
caregiver should always be within arm’s reach. Adolescents require active 
adult supervision and avoidance of alcohol or drug use during water 
activities.
Learning to swim
 offers another layer of protection. Children may 
start swim lessons at an early age that are developmentally appropriate 
and aimed at the individual child’s readiness and skill level. Swim les
-
sons are beneficial and provide some level of protection to young chil
-
dren. A study from Bangladesh, where drowning accounts for 20% of 
all deaths in children age 1- 4 years, showed that swim lessons and water 
safety curricula are cost- effective and led to a decrease in mortality from 
drowning. As with any other water safety intervention, parents need to 
know that swimming lessons and acquisition of swim skills cannot be 
solely relied on to prevent drowning. 
No child can be drown- proof.
 A 
supervising caretaker should be aware of where and how to get help and 
know how to safely rescue a child in trouble. Because only those trained 
in water rescue can safely attempt it, families should be encouraged to 
swim in designated areas only when and where a lifeguard is on duty.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 88
 u 
Drowning and  Submersion Injury 
645
Children and adolescents should never swim alone regardless of 
their swimming abilities. Even as they become more independent 
and participate in recreational activities without their parents, they 
should be encouraged to seek areas that are watched by 
lifeguards
. The 
United States Lifesaving Association (USLA) reports that more than 
75% of drownings at USLA sites occurred at times when the beaches 
were unguarded. It is important to emphasize that even if the child is 
considered a strong swimmer, the ability to swim in a pool does not 
translate to being safe in open water, where water temperature, cur
-
rents, and underwater obstacles can present additional and unfamiliar 
challenges. For swimmers, supervision by lifeguards reduces drowning 
risk, because lifeguards monitor risk behaviors and are trained in the 
difficult and potentially dangerous task of rescuing drowning victims.
Two	of	the	preventive	strategies	listed	in	
Table	88.1
 deserve special 
mention. The most vigorously evaluated and effective drowning inter
-
vention applies to swimming pools. Compared with no fencing, instal
-
lation of four- sided 
isolation fencing
 surrounding in- ground and 
aboveground pools with a secure, self- locking gate decreases the 
number of pool immersion injuries among young children by more 
than 50%. Guidelines for appropriate fencing, provided by the U.S. 
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), are very specific; they 
were developed through testing of active toddlers in a gymnastics pro
-
gram on their ability to climb barriers of different materials and heights, 
and recent studies show them to be effective in preventing drowning in 
young children. In families who have a pool on their property, caregivers 
often erroneously believe that if a child falls into the water, there will be a 
loud noise or splash to alert them. Unfortunately, these events are usually 
silent, delaying timely rescue. This finding highlights the need for a fence 
that separates the pool from the house, not just surrounds the entire 
property. The CPSC recommends power safety covers be installed on 
pools, as well as door alarms if the pool is not completely separated from 
the house and the yard by a fence. Entrapment and hair entanglement in 
open drains or pipes are other risks commonly associated with drowning 
in the pediatric population; special drain covers, safety vacuum release 
systems, and filter pumps with multiple drains can help prevent this.
The use of U.S. Coast Guard–approved 
lifejackets or PFDs
 should 
be advised with all families spending time around open water, not just 
those who consider themselves boaters. A PFD should be chosen with 
respect to the weight of the child and the proposed activity. Young chil
-
dren should wear PFDs that will float their head up. Parents should 
be urged to wear PFDs as well, because their use of PFDs is associated 
with	greater	use	by	their	children.	Toys	such	as	water	wings	and	“float
-
ies” should not be relied on as drowning prevention measures. The use 
of life jackets decreases boat- related drowning morbidity and mortality 
by 50%; unfortunately, their use remains low.
Effective preventive efforts must also consider 
cultural practices
. 
Different ethnic groups may have certain attitudes, beliefs, dress, or 
other customs that may affect their water safety. The higher drowning 
risk of minority children needs to be addressed by community- based 
prevention programs.
In addition to anticipatory guidance, pediatricians can play an active 
role in drowning prevention by participating in advocacy efforts to 
improve legislation for pool fencing, PFD use, and alcohol consump
-
tion in various water activities. Several counties in the United States, 
Australia, and New Zealand have laws requiring isolation fencing for 
pools. Their effectiveness has been limited by a lack of enforcement. 
Similarly, all states have boating- under- the- influence laws but, simi
-
larly, rarely enforce them. Furthermore, efforts at the community level 
may be needed to ensure the availability of swimming lessons for 
underserved populations and lifeguarded swim areas.
The Drowning Chain of Survival refers to a series of steps that, when 
followed, attempt to reduce mortality associated with drowning. The steps 
of the chain include prevent drowning, recognize distress, provide flotation, 
remove from water, and provide care as needed. These interventions may 
be used by the drowning victim for self- rescue or via bystanders who rec
-
ognize child distress, initiate rescue, and provide resuscitation. The timeline 
shows that rescue and resuscitation must occur within minutes to save lives, 
and care should be taken by rescuers to not become victims themselves.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Table 88.1 
 
  Approach to Prevention Strategies for Drowning
HOME
RECREATION
NEIGHBORHOOD
Water hazards
	•		Swimming	pools
	•		Ponds
	•		Bathtubs
	•		Large	buckets
	•		Drain	entrapment
	•		Playing	in	water	(swimming,	wading)
	•		Playing	near	water
	•		Being	on	water	(boating)
	•		Irrigation	ditches
	•		Watering	holes
	•		Water	drainage
Common risks
	•		Lapse	in	supervision
	•		Unexpected	toddler	exposure
	•		Delayed	discovery	of	child
	•		Reliance	on	water	wings	or	pool	toys
	•		Reliance	on	sibling	or	bath	seat	for	
bathing supervision
	•		Epilepsy
	•		Autism
	•		ADHD
	•		LQTS
	•		Lapse	in	supervision
	•		Change	in	weather
	•		Unfamiliarity	with	or	change(s)	in	
water conditions:
	•		Steep	drop-	off
	•		Current/tide
	•		Low	temperature
	•		Alcohol	and	other	drug	use
	•		Peer	pressure
	•		Lapse	in	supervision,	
particularly when caregiver is 
socializing
	•		Risky	behavior	when	with	peers
Prevention strategies
	•		Recognize	hazards	and	risks
	•		Provide	constant	adult	supervision	
around water
	•		Install	4-	sided,	isolation	locked	fencing	
of pools
	•		Install	rescue	equipment	and	phone	at	
poolside
	•		Learn	swimming	and	water	survival	
skills
	•		Avoid	unsupervised	baths	in	older	
child/teen with seizure disorder; instead, 
shower
	•		Learn	first	aid	and	CPR
	•		Provide	constant	adult	supervision
	•		Swim	in	lifeguarded	areas
	•		Know	when	and	how	to	wear	US	
Coast Guard–approved PFDs
	•		Avoid	alcohol	and	other	drugs
	•		Learn	swimming	and	water	survival	
skills
	•		Teach	children	about	water	safety
	•		Be	aware	of	current	weather	and	
water conditions
	•		Buddy	system
	•		Learn	first	aid	and	CPR
	•		Identify	hazardous	bodies	of	
water
	•		Prevent	access	to	water	with	
barriers
	•		Provide	fenced-	in	“safe	area”	
for water recreation
	•		Provide	lifeguarded	swim	sites
	•		Provide	access	to	low-	cost	
swim/water survival lessons
ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; LQTS, long QT syndrome; PFDs, personal floatation devices.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

646 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Burns are among the top five leading causes of 
unintentional injury
 in 
children, after motor vehicle crashes, suffocation, drowning, and poison
-
ing. There has been a decline in the incidence of burn injury requiring 
medical care that has coincided with a stronger focus on burn treatment 
and prevention, increased fire and burn prevention education, greater 
availability of regional treatment centers, widespread use of smoke detec
-
tors, greater regulation of consumer products and occupational safety, 
and societal changes such as reductions in smoking and alcohol abuse.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Approximately 1.1 million people in the United States require medical 
care for burn injuries each year, with over 100,000 children admitted to 
a hospital or treated in the emergency department (ED). 
Fires
 remain 
a major cause of mortality in children, but children <14 years old have 
a lower relative risk of dying in a fire than the general population.
Thermal burns
 are caused when an external heat source comes in 
contact with the skin and tissues causing injury; thermal burns may 
occur from contact with hot surfaces, hot liquids, steam, or flame. 
Scald burns
 are most prevalent in children 
≤
4 years old and account 
for 65% of burn- related admissions in this age- group. Although the 
incidence of hot water scalding has been reduced by legislation requir
-
ing water heaters to be preset at 48.9°C (120°F), scald injury remains 
the leading cause of hospitalization for burns in this age- group. 
Steam
 
inhalation used as a home remedy to treat respiratory infections is a 
rare potential cause of burns. 
Flame burns
 are the most common cause 
of burn injury in all age- groups 
≥
5 years old. Electrical and chemi
-
cal burns are also more common in older children and adults than in 
young children. 
Clothing ignition
 events have declined since passage 
of the Federal Flammable Fabric Act requiring sleepwear to be flame- 
retardant. Polyester is the fabric most resistant to ignition by a small 
flame source. Polyester burns deeply as it melts, but it self- extinguishes 
when the flame source is removed. Cotton
,
 on the other hand, contin
-
ues to burn after the flame source has been removed, resulting in large, 
deep burns. Polyester melts downward, sparing the face and respira
-
tory tract; cotton burns upward toward the face. Pellet stoves, glass 
front stoves, and flat top stoves are frequent sources of hand burns in 
children, as is contact with hot hair appliances, such as curling irons 
and hair straighteners. Approximately 18% of burns are the result of 
child abuse
 (usually scalds), making it important to assess the pattern 
and site of injury and their consistency with the patient’s history (see 
Chapter 17
). 
Friction burns
 from treadmills are also a problem. Hands 
are the most commonly injured sites, with burns ranging from deep 
second- degree to fourth- degree with tendon disruption and fractures 
from the friction injury. 
Anoxia,
 not the actual burn, is a major cause 
of morbidity and mortality in house fires.
Review of the history usually shows a common pattern: a v- shaped 
distribution of the scald burns to the chest and abdomen if liquid 
is pulled from a table or stove, burns in the pant leg area if clothing 
ignites, burns in a splash pattern from a hot liquid spill, and burns on 
the palm of the hand from contact with a hot stove or curling iron. 
However, 
glove or stocking burns
 of the hands and feet; single- area 
deep burns on the trunk, buttocks, or back; and small, full- thickness 
burns (e.g., cigarette burns) in young children should raise the suspi
-
cion of child abuse.
Burn care
 involves a range of activities: prevention, acute care and 
resuscitation, wound management, pain relief, reconstruction, reha
-
bilitation, and psychosocial adjustment. Children with massive burns 
require early and appropriate psychologic and social support as well as 
resuscitation. Surgical debridement, wound closure, and rehabilitative 
efforts should be instituted concurrently to promote optimal outcomes. 
To	maximize	survival,	the	clinical	approach	includes	aggressive	surgi
-
cal removal of devitalized tissue with timely skin closure via grafting, 
infection control, and judicious use of antibiotics; life support with 
endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation; and use of early 
enteral nutrition. Children who have sustained burn injuries differ in 
appearance from their peers, necessitating supportive efforts for reen
-
try to school and social and sporting activities.
PREVENTION
The aim of burn prevention is a continuing reduction in the number 
of serious burn injuries (
Table	89.1
). Effective first aid and triage can 
decrease both the extent (area) and the severity (depth) of injuries. The 
use of flame- retardant clothing and smoke detectors, control of hot 
water temperature (thermostat settings) to 48.9°C (120°F) within build
-
ings, and prohibition of cigarette smoking have been partially successful 
in	reducing	the	incidence	of	burn	injuries.	Treatment	of	children	with	
significant burn injuries in dedicated burn centers facilitates medically 
effective care, improves survival, and leads to greater cost efficiency. 
Survival of at least 80% of patients with burns of 90% of the total body 
surface	area	(TBSA)	is	possible	for	children	and	young	adults.	Death	is	
more likely in children with irreversible anoxic brain injury sustained at 
the time of the burn. Some burns occur on a seasonal basis, including:
Winter:
	•		Glass-	front	fireplaces/pellet	stoves	and	radiators	increase	hand	burns
	•		Treadmill	injuries	as	more	people	exercise	inside—child	imitates	
adults or young child touches belt
	•		Soup	scald	burns	from	spilling	liquid	while	removing	bowl	from	mi
-
crowave
Summer:
	•		Fireworks,	sparklers—temperatures	reach	537.8°C	(1,000°F)
	•		Burn	contact	with	hot	grill;	hand/feet	burn	from	hot	embers
	•		Burns	from	children	walking	or	falling	into	a	campfire
	•		Lawnmowers
Spring/Fall:
	•		Burning	leaves
	•		Gasoline	burns
	•		Tap	water	scalds
	•		House	fires	from	propane	heater	explosion
Pediatricians can play a major role in preventing the most com
-
mon burns by educating parents and healthcare providers. Simple, 
effective, efficient, and cost- effective preventive measures include the 
use of appropriate clothing and smoke detectors and the planning of 
routes for emergency exit from the home. The National Fire Protection 
Association (NFPA) recommends replacing smoke detector batteries 
Chapter 
89
Burn Injuries
Tina L. Palmieri
Table 89.1 
 
  Burn Prophylaxis
PREVENT FIRES
Install and use smoke detectors.
Control the hot water thermostat; maximum water temperature 
should be 48.9°C (120°F).
Keep fire, matches, and lighters out of the reach of children.
Avoid cigarette smoking, especially in bed.
Do not leave lit candles unattended.
Keep hair appliances such as curling irons and straighteners out of 
the reach of children.
Use caution when cooking, especially with oil.
Keep cloth items off heaters.
PREVENT INJURY
Stop, drop, and roll (do not run) if clothing catches fire; wrap in a 
blanket.
Practice escape procedures.
Crawl beneath smoke if a fire occurs indoors.
Use educational materials.
*
*National Fire Protection Association pamphlets and videos.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89
 u 
Burn Injuries 
647
annually and the smoke detector alarm every 10 years (or earlier, if 
indicated on the device).
 
ACUTE CARE, RESUSCITATION, AND ASSESSMENT
Indications for Admission
Burns	covering	>10%	TBSA,	burns	associated	with	smoke	inhala
-
tion, burns resulting from high- tension (voltage) electrical injuries, 
and burns associated with suspected child abuse or neglect should 
be treated emergently and referred to a burn center for definitive care 
(
Table	89.2
). Small first-  and second- degree burns of the hands, feet, 
face, perineum, and joint surfaces may require admission if close fol
-
low- up care is difficult to provide. Children who have been in enclosed- 
space fires and those who have significant face and neck burns should 
be evaluated carefully for airway or neurologic compromise, including 
monitoring for 24 hours in the hospital for potential central nervous 
system (CNS) effects of anoxia from carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning 
or pulmonary effects from smoke inhalation.
 
First Aid Measures
Acute care should include the following measures:
 1.  Extinguish flames by rolling the child on the ground; cover the child 
with a blanket, coat, or carpet.
 2.  Remove smoldering clothing or clothing saturated with hot liquid. 
Jewelry, particularly rings and bracelets, should be removed or cut 
away to prevent constriction and vascular compromise during the 
edema phase in the first 24- 72 hours after burn injury.
 3.  In cases of 
chemical injury
, brush off any remaining chemical, if 
powdered or solid; then use copious irrigation or wash the affected 
area with water. Call the local poison control center for the neutral
-
izing agent to treat a chemical ingestion.
 4.  Wash the burned area with soap and cool running water. For burns 
on less than 10% of the body, irrigate with cool tap water for 10- 20 
minutes.	Significant	large-	burn	injury	(>15%	TBSA)	decreases	body	
temperature control so the use of cold water is contraindicated.
 5.  Cover the burned area with clean, dry sheeting or dressing. Avoid 
using tape.
 6.  If the burn is caused by 
hot tar,
 cool the burn and then use mineral 
oil to remove the tar.
 7.  Administer analgesic medications.
 
Emergency Care
Supportive measures are as follows (
Table	89.3
 and 
Table	89.4
):
 1.  Rapidly review the cardiovascular and pulmonary status and docu
-
ment preexisting or physiologic lesions (asthma, congenital heart 
disease, renal or hepatic disease).
 2.  Ensure and maintain an adequate airway (
Fig. 89.1
). For any child 
with a facial burn or suspected inhalation of smoke, the following 
actions are indicated:
 a.  Start 100% oxygen and measure carboxyhemoglobin (CO) lev
-
els as well as a blood gas, because cutaneous oxygen saturations 
are not accurate in CO poisoning (see Chapters 79 and 86
).
 b.  Assess for laryngeal edema (examine mouth; assess for stridor, 
retractions) and intubate for evidence of significant airway com
-
promise.
 c.  Assess oxygenation to evaluate for lung damage from smoke in
-
halation. Bronchoscopy may be helpful in the intubated child 
to further delineate the extent of smoke inhalation injury. Use a 
humidified ventilator circuit to prevent dry secretions that can 
obstruct an airway.
	3.		Children	with	burns	>15%	TBSA	require	intravenous	(IV)	fluid	
resuscitation to maintain adequate perfusion. IV access is prefer
-
ably obtained in a nonburned area, but if none is readily available, 
placing the initial line through a burn may be necessary. Monitor 
peripheral IV sites closely for infiltration, as extremities will be
-
come edematous after burn injury. In an emergency situation in 
which IV access is unattainable, an intraosseous (IO) line may be 
placed. The IO line should be replaced in a timely fashion with a 
central line, as IO needles may be unable to sustain the large fluid 
volume needed for major burn resuscitation. Patients with inhala
-
tion	injury,	regardless	of	the	extent	of	TBSA	burn,	require	large	
volumes of fluid for resuscitation due to insensible losses from the 
injured airway epithelium. Significant high- tension and electrical 
injuries require venous access to ensure sufficient fluid resuscita
-
tion volumes, as forced alkaline diuresis may be needed in fluid- 
refractory myoglobinuria to avoid renal damage. Lactated Ringer 
solution, 10- 20 mL/kg/hr 
(normal saline may be used if lactated 
Ringer solution is not available), is initially infused until proper flu
-
id replacement can be calculated. Consultation with a specialized 
burn unit should be made to coordinate fluid therapy, including 
the type of fluid, the preferred formula for calculation, and prefer
-
ences for the use of colloid agents, particularly if transfer to a burn 
center is anticipated.
 4.  For patients with circumferential burns of the extremities, elevate 
the extremities and monitor perfusion (capillary refill, pulses), as 
compartment syndrome (see 
Chapter 80
) may develop and require 
escharotomy.
 5.  Evaluate the child for associated injuries. Children with burns may 
have associated accidental traumatic injuries (fall) or nonacciden
-
tal injuries (child abuse). In cases of high- voltage electrical burn 
(>1,000 volts), especially if there has also been a fall from a height, 
injuries to the spine, bones, and thoracic or intraabdominal organs 
may occur (see 
Chapter 80
). Cervical spine precautions should be 
observed until this injury is ruled out. If ventricular fibrillation oc
-
curs at the scene of an electrocution, cardiopulmonary resuscita
-
tion (CPR) should be instituted promptly, and cardiac monitoring 
started on the patient’s arrival at the ED (see 
Chapter 79
).
	6.		Children	with	burns	of	>15%	TBSA	should	not	initially	receive	oral	
fluids because gastric distention may develop. These children may re
-
quire insertion of a nasogastric tube in the ED to prevent aspiration.
 7.  A Foley catheter should be inserted into the bladder to monitor 
urine output in children who require IV fluid resuscitation.
able 89.2 
 
  Indications for Referral to a Burn Center
Partial-	thickness	burns	affecting	>10%	TBSA
Full-	thickness	burn	affecting	>5%	TBSA
Third- degree burns
Electrical burns caused by high- tension wires or lightning
Chemical burns
Inhalation injury, regardless of the amount of TBSA burned
Inadequate home or social environment
Suspected child abuse or neglect
Burns to the face, hands, feet, perineum, genitals, or major joints
Burns in patients with preexisting medical conditions that may 
complicate the acute recovery phase
Associated injuries (fractures)
TBSA, Total body surface area.
Adapted from American Burn Association/American College of Surgeons. Guidelines 
for the operation of burn centers. 
J Burn Care Res
. 2007;28(1):134–141 and Bettencourt 
AP, Romanowski KS, Joe V, et al. Updating the Burn Center Referral Criteria: Results 
from the 2018 eDelphi Consensus Study. 
J Burn Care Res
. 2020;41(5):1052–1062.
Table 89.3 
 
  Acute Treatment of Burns
First aid, including washing of wounds and removal of devitalized 
tissue
Fluid resuscitation
Provision of energy requirements
Control of pain
Prevention of infection
Early excision and grafting
Prevention of excessive metabolic expenditures
Control of bacterial wound flora
Early mobility, range of motion, and strength exercises
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

648 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
 8.  In general, wounds should be wrapped with a clean sheet or dress
-
ing until it is decided whether to treat the patient on an outpatient 
basis or refer to an appropriate facility.
 9.  For children trapped in a fire, a CO measurement (carboxyhemo
-
globin [HbCO]) should be obtained and 100% oxygen adminis
-
tered until the result is known. Pulse oximetry is unreliable in CO 
poisoning.
 10.  Review child immunizations, including tetanus immunization. 
Use	diphtheria,	tetanus	toxoids,	and	acellular	pertussis	(DTaP)	
for tetanus prophylaxis for children <7 years old, and use tetanus, 
diphtheria,	and	pertussis	(TdaP)	for	children	
≥
7 years old (see 
Chapter 257
).
 
Classification of Burns
Proper triage and treatment of burn injury require assessment of the 
extent and depth of the injury (
Table	89.5
 and 
Fig. 89.2
). 
First- degree 
burns
 involve only the epidermis and are characterized by swelling, 
erythema,	and	pain	(similar	to	mild	sunburn).	Tissue	damage	is	usually	
minimal, and there is no blistering. Pain resolves in 48- 72 hours; in a 
small percentage of patients, the damaged epithelium peels off, leaving 
no residual scars.
A 
second- degree burn
 involves injury to the entire epidermis and a 
variable portion of the dermal layer (vesicle and blister formation are 
characteristic). A 
superficial
 second- degree burn is extremely painful 
because many remaining viable nerve endings are exposed. Superficial 
Table 89.4 
 
  Phases of Burn Care
PHASE AND TIMING
PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES
OBJECTIVES
1
: Resuscitation, 0- 72 hours
Massive capillary leak, edema, and burn 
shock
Airway, breathing, and circulation optimization via 
 
accurate fluid resuscitation and thorough evaluation
2
: Acute treatment phase, day 3 through 
discharge
Hyperdynamic and catabolic state, 
 
immunosuppression, risk of infection
Enteral nutrition to optimize wound healing; excision 
and biologic wound closure of full- thickness wounds 
with excision and grafting within 7 days of injury
3
: Rehabilitation, day 1 through discharge
Gradual waning of initial catabolic state, 
wounds heal, scars form, and strength 
recovers
Maintain and restore range of motion; reduce edema; 
strengthen muscles; facilitate return to home, work, 
and school
Fig. 89.1
 Algorithm for primary survey of a ma
-
jor burn injury. (
From Hettiaratchy S, Papini R. Ini
-
tial management of a major burn. I. Overview. BMJ. 
2004;328:1555–1557.
)
AirwayCompromised or at risk
of compromise?IntubateEscharotomiesGo back and re-evaluateBreathing
Compromised?Cause:
Mechanical
CarboxyhemoglobinSmoke inhalationBlast injuryConsider:Hypoxia (carboxyhemoglobin level?)
HypovolemiaEscharotomiesIntubate and ventilate; O2Nebulizers; O2Noninvasive ventilation
Invasive ventilation
Invasive ventilation
Chest drainsYesYesNoCirculation
Compromised perfusion
to an extremity?NoNeurological disabilityImpaired score on 
Glasgow coma scale?NoYesYesExposure
Fully assess burn area and depth
Full examination for concomitant injuries
Keep warmFluidsCalculate resuscitation formula based 
on surface area and time since burnNo
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89
 u 
Burn Injuries 
649
second- degree burns heal in 7- 14 days as the epithelium regenerates 
in the absence of infection. 
Mid- level to deep
 second- degree burns will 
generally heal in 14- 21 days, but often result in significant scarring. 
Deep second- degree burns tend to be dry, pale, and white (flame) or 
red (scald); they are often grafted to mitigate scarring (
Fig. 89.3
). Pain 
may be less with these burns than in more superficial burns because 
fewer nerve endings remain viable; however, the edge of the burn, 
which will be less deep, will still cause pain. Fluid losses and metabolic 
effects of deep dermal (second- degree) burns are essentially the same 
as those of third- degree burns. If a blister is intact in a burned area, the 
burn is at least second- degree but may be deeper. Definitive diagnosis 
of burn depth is not possible because the blister blocks visualization of 
the burned tissue under the blister.
Full- thickness
, or 
third- degree burns
, involve destruction of the 
entire epidermis and dermis, leaving no residual epidermal cells to 
repopulate the damaged area. The wound heals by wound contraction 
or skin grafting. Wounds are either white or leathery (flame burn) or 
mottled, nonblanching, and cherry red (scald) (
Fig. 89.4
). The absence 
of painful sensation and capillary filling demonstrates the loss of nerve 
and capillary elements. Pain exists at the edges of the burn. Hence, 
using pain to determine burn depth is not accurate.
Technologies	can	help	accurately	determine	the	depth	of	burns.	
Laser 
Doppler imaging
 can be used from 25 days after the burn. It pro
-
duces a color map of the affected tissue; 
yellow
 indicates second- degree 
burns, reflecting the presence of capillaries, arterioles, and venules, and 
blue
 reflects very low or absence of blood flow, which indicates third- 
degree burns. Although early reports are promising, the clinical utility 
of laser Doppler imaging for burn depth determination is not clearly 
established.
 
Estimation of Total Body Surface Area for a Burn
Appropriate burn charts for different childhood age- groups should be 
used	to	accurately	estimate	the	extent	of	TBSA	burned.	The	extent	and	
depth of the burn are the largest determinants of fluid resuscitation 
requirements. Mortality and morbidity also depend on the extent and 
depth of the burn. Children have a larger surface area to mass ratio than 
adults, and the variable growth rate of the child’s head and extremities 
makes it necessary to use body surface area (BSA) charts, such as that 
modified by Lund and Brower, to accurately calculate burn size (
Fig. 
89.5
). Another method of estimating burn size is to employ the palm 
rule. The palm of the child’s hand (from base of palm to fingertip) is 
1%	of	the	child’s	TBSA.	A	quick	method	of	estimating	burn	size	is	to	
hold your hand up to the child’s hand to gauge the area and use that to 
determine burn size. The 
rule of nines
 used in adults should only be 
used in children >14 years old or >20 kg as a rough estimate to institute 
therapy before transfer to a burn center. The rule of nines divides body 
regions by 9% BSA: head and neck, chest and upper back, each arm, 
abdomen, lower back, upper leg, and lower leg; hand or genitals (1%).
 
TREATMENT
Outpatient Management of Minor Burns
A	patient	with	first-		and	second-	degree	burns	<10%	TBSA	may	be	
treated on an outpatient basis unless pain is uncontrolled on oral 
agents, the family cannot successfully complete wound care, or there 
are issues of child neglect or abuse. These outpatients do not require 
prophylactic antibiotics. Blisters should be left intact and dressed with 
a	nonstick	dressing	such	as	Telfa	or	Xeroform.	Topical	creams	do	not	
penetrate the blister and are not indicated unless the blister ruptures. 
Dressings should be changed once daily, after the wound is washed with 
lukewarm water. Very small wounds, especially those on the face, may 
be treated with bacitracin ointment and left open. 
Debridement
 (i.e., 
removal) of the devitalized skin is indicated when the blisters rupture. 
A variety of wound dressings are available for application to second- 
degree burns; the affected area should be subsequently wrapped with 
a dry, clean dressing. Silver dressings are popular because they provide 
pain relief, prevent wound desiccation, reduce wound colonization, and 
can be left in place for 5- 7 days (
Table	89.6
). Although silver dressings 
are antimicrobial, wound infections can occur beneath these dressings. 
Patients should be instructed to seek immediate medical care for signs 
and symptoms of infection (elevated temperature, malaise, pain) and 
should be reevaluated at least weekly by the medical team. The great 
majority of superficial burns heal in 7- 10 days, with deep second- 
degree burns taking longer to heal. Burns that have not healed within 
2 weeks (or clearly will not be healed in 2 weeks) have a >97% chance 
of developing a significant scar and should be referred to a burn center.
EpidermisSuperficialSuperficialdermalDeepdermalFull-thicknessDermisSub-cutaneous
Fig. 89.2
 Diagram of different burn depths. (
From Hettiaratchy S, 
Papini R. Initial management of a major burn. II. Assessment and resus
-
citation. BMJ. 2004;329:101–103.
)
Table 89.5 
 
  Categories of Burn Depth
FIRST- DEGREE BURN
SECOND- DEGREE BURN 
 
(PARTIAL THICKNESS)
THIRD- DEGREE BURN 
 
(FULL- THICKNESS)
Surface appearance
Dry, no blisters
Minimal or no edema
Erythematous
Blanches, bleeds
Moist blebs, blisters
Underlying tissue is mottled pink and white, 
with fair capillary refill
Bleeds
Dry, leathery eschar
Mixed white, waxy, khaki, mahogany, 
soot- stained
No blanching or bleeding
Pain
Very painful
Very painful
Insensate centrally, edges (usually less 
deep) may still have sensation
Histologic depth
Epidermal layers only
Epidermis, papillary, and reticular layers of 
dermis
May include domes of subcutaneous layers
Through all layers of the skin to 
 
subcutaneous tissue (loss of muscle, 
bone is fourth- degree burn)
Healing time
2- 5 days with no scarring
Superficial: 5- 21 days with no grafting
Deep partial: 21- 35 days with no infection, but 
scar is expected; if infected, converts to 
 
full- thickness burn
Large areas require grafting, but small 
areas may heal from the edges after 
weeks
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

650 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
The palm of the hand is one of the most frequently burned areas 
in children, particularly toddlers. Because the skin on the palm of the 
hand is thicker than other parts of the body, burns to the palm often 
heal. Generally, blisters of the palm can be left intact unless they are 
already open, or they are so large that they will likely rupture (usually 
about 1- 2 cm in height), or purulence is draining from the blister. If 
leaving a blister intact, inform the family to either return to the office 
if the blister ruptures or instruct them on how to remove the blister 
and apply bacitracin to the wound. If a palm burn has not healed in 2 
weeks (or it is clear that it will not be healed), referral to a burn center 
is needed.
The depth of scald injuries is difficult to assess early, as the wounds 
are often reddish in color. Nonoperative treatment is appropriate ini
-
tially. Generally, third- degree scald burns will become increasingly 
pale and white by 4- 5 days post injury, whereas those that heal will be 
a lighter pink color. A wound that has not healed in 2 weeks will likely 
need grafting (
Fig. 89.6
). This conservative approach obviates the risk 
of anesthesia and unnecessary grafting.
 
Fluid Resuscitation
Fluid resuscitation, if required, should begin as soon as possible (at 
the scene, in the ED, or before transfer) after the injury has occurred 
because delays of as little as 30 minutes affect outcomes. Numerous 
formulas exist to help guide practitioners in calculating fluid resus
-
citation needs in patients with burns. For most children, the 
Park
-
land formula
 is an appropriate 
guideline
 to determine starting IV fluid 
resuscitation rate; however, fluids should be adjusted hourly based on 
the patient’s response. The steps in calculating the starting rate are as 
follows:
 1.  Calculate the 24- hour fluid requirement: 4 mL lactated Ringer solu
-
tion	per	(times)	weight	in	kg	per	(times)	%	TBSA	burned.	The	TBSA	
burned	is	a	whole	number,	NOT	a	percentage.
 2.  Determine the volume of fluid to be given in the first 8 hours: for the 
Parkland formula, that is half of the 24- hour requirement.
 3.  Calculate the starting hourly infusion rate: divide the volume to be 
given in the first 8 hours by 8 to determine the starting rate. The 
AB
Fig. 89.3
 Second- degree burns. 
A,
 Superficial partial- thickness (second- degree) burn, which is pink and glistening. 
B,
 Deep partial- thickness 
(second- degree) burn. The white- appearing area over the dorsum of the hand is a deep partial- thickness burn. (
From Singer AJ, Lee CC. Thermal 
burns. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS, Gausche- Hill M, et al., eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: 
Figs. 56.1
 and 
56.2, p. 717.
)
Fig. 89.4
 Full- thickness (third- degree) burn over both feet. The cen
-
tral area is depressed and has a yellowish color indicating it is full thick
-
ness. (
Modified from Singer AJ, Lee CC. Thermal burns. In: Walls RM, 
Hockberger RS, Gausche- Hill M, et al., eds. Rosen’s Emergency Medi
-
cine, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: 
Fig. 56.3
, p. 717.
)
1ABCDEFGHIJNEWBORN18%40%
16%
26%3 YR15%
40%
16%
29%6 YR12%40%16%32%12+ YR%BURNEDANTHEADTRUNKR. ARML. ARMR. LEGL. LEGTOTALPOST6%38%18%38%HEADTRUNKARMSLEGS2345678%1° 2° 3° Date BurnedDate of Evaluation
Fig. 89.5
 Chart to determine developmentally related percentage of 
body surface area affected by burn injury. ANT, Anterior; POST, poste
-
rior; R., right; L., left. (
Courtesy Shriners Hospital, Burn Institute, Boston 
Unit.
)
Table 89.6 
 
  Select Silver Antimicrobial Dressings for Burns
DRESSING
CHARACTERISTIC(S)
Mepitel Ag
Silicone mesh dressing
Mepilex Ag
Foam dressing
ACTICOAT
Polyethylene nonadherent net dressing
AQUACEL Ag
Absorptive Hydrofiber
Silverlon
Knitted nylon nonadherent dressing
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89
 u 
Burn Injuries 
651
infusion rate is adjusted hourly based on urine output goals of 0.8- 1 
mL/hour in children <20 kg or <12 years of age and 0.4- 0.5 mL/kg/
hr (maximum of 30 mL/hr) in children >12 years or >20 kg.
Providers should increase the fluid rate by 10% if urine output is 
below the hourly target and decrease the fluids by 10% if over the tar
-
get. Because major burns have a hypermetabolic response, tachycardia 
is	NOT	an	accurate	measure	of	resuscitation	in	a	child	with	a	major	
burn. Acid- base balance, mental status, serum lactate, and noninvasive 
monitoring are useful adjuncts to evaluate the adequacy of resuscita
-
tion. Because of interstitial edema and sequestration of fluid in muscle 
cells, patients may gain up to 20% over baseline (preburn) body weight. 
Patients	with	burns	of	>20%	TBSA	often	require	a	large	venous	access	
(central venous line) to deliver the fluid required over the critical first 
24 hours; these patients are best cared for in a specialized pediatric 
burn unit. In addition to fluid resuscitation, children <20 kg should 
receive standard maintenance fluids (see 
Chapter 74
).
During the second 24 hours after the burn, patients begin to reab
-
sorb edema fluid and to experience diuresis. IV fluid requirements 
after resuscitation will consist of isotonic crystalloid infusion for insen
-
sible losses (see 
Chapter 73
) plus the fluid losses from the burn wound. 
Controversy surrounds whether 
colloid
 should be provided in the early 
period of burn resuscitation. One preference is to administer albumin 
if a patient is not responding to crystalloid resuscitation. In children 
<12 months old, sodium tolerance is limited; the volume and sodium 
concentration of the resuscitation solution should be decreased if the 
urinary sodium level is rising. The adequacy of resuscitation should 
be constantly reassessed by integrating vital signs with urine output, 
blood gas, serum lactate, base deficit, hematocrit, and serum protein 
measurements. Some patients require arterial and central venous lines, 
particularly those undergoing multiple excision and grafting proce
-
dures, for monitoring and fluid replacement purposes. Central venous 
pressure monitoring may be indicated to assess circulation in patients 
with hemodynamic or cardiopulmonary instability. Femoral vein can
-
nulation is a safe access for fluid resuscitation, especially in infants and 
children. Burn patients who require frequent blood gas monitoring 
benefit from radial or femoral arterial catheterization.
Oral supplementation may start as soon as enteral access is obtained. 
Early nutrition helps to minimize effects of the hypermetabolic 
response. Milk formula, artificial feedings, homogenized milk, or soy- 
based products can be given by bolus or constant infusion through a 
nasogastric or small bowel feeding tube. These feedings are not part of 
the initial 24- hour fluid resuscitation, as absorption may be variable. 
When oral fluids are tolerated after several days, IV fluids are decreased 
proportionately to keep the total fluid intake constant, particularly if 
pulmonary dysfunction is present.
Colloids	such	as	albumin	are	lost	through	the	burn	wound.	To	
maintain oncotic pressure and protein binding, a 
5% or 25% albumin 
infusion
 may be used to maintain the serum albumin levels at a 
desired 2 g/dL. Infusion of 
packed red blood cells
 is recommended if 
the hematocrit falls to <20% (hemoglobin = 7 g/dL). Most patients are 
hemoconcentrated during resuscitation; thus transfusion in the first 
24- 48 hours is rare unless there is accompanying trauma. 
Fresh- frozen 
plasma
 (FFP) is indicated if clinical and laboratory assessment shows 
a deficiency of clotting factors, a prothrombin level >1.5 times control, 
or a partial thromboplastin time >1.2 times control in children who are 
bleeding or are scheduled for an invasive procedure or a grafting pro
-
cedure that could result in an estimated blood loss of more than half of 
blood volume. Although FFP use for volume resuscitation during the 
first 24 hours of injury is advocated by some, this strategy has not yet 
undergone rigorous evaluation through randomized prospective trials.
Sodium supplementation
 may be required for children with burns 
of	>20%	TBSA,	particularly	if	0.5%	silver	nitrate	solution	is	used	as	the	
topical antibacterial burn dressing. Sodium losses with silver nitrate 
therapy are regularly as high as 350 mEq/m
2
 burn surface area. The aim 
is to maintain serum sodium levels >130 mEq/L and urinary sodium 
concentration >30 mEq/L. Young children <5 years are especially sus
-
ceptible to hyponatremia and cerebral edema. IV 
potassium supple
-
mentation
 is supplied to maintain a serum potassium level >3 mEq/
dL. Potassium losses may be significantly increased when 0.5% silver 
nitrate solution is used as the topical antibacterial agent or when ami
-
noglycoside, diuretic, or amphotericin therapy is required. Magnesium 
and ionized calcium can also become rapidly depleted and should be 
assessed at least daily for the first week and weekly thereafter in major 
burns.
 
Prevention of Infection and Surgical Management of 
the Burn Wound
In general, prophylactic antibiotic administration is not indicated for 
burn injuries because it predisposes patients to development of resis
-
tant	pathogens.	Topical	antimicrobial	creams	or	silver	agents	reduce	
wound colonization; systemic antibiotics do not reach the nonviable 
tissue in the burn wound. There is conflicting evidence as to whether 
relocation of the IV catheter every 48- 72 hours decreases or increases 
the incidence of catheter- related sepsis in burn injury. Central venous 
catheters should be monitored closely for infection. Many burn units 
replace or relocate central lines every 5- 7 days, even if the site is not 
inflamed and there is no suspicion of catheter- related sepsis, particu
-
larly if the line is near a burn wound. The incidence of central line–
associated bloodstream infection is directly related to the distance 
between the catheter and the burn wound. The fragile tissue and fre
-
quency of patient turning and movement, combined with the mois
-
ture of the burn wound, make it imperative to securely attach central 
venous catheters with sutures placed securely in at least three locations 
to prevent catheter movement, kinking, or accidental removal.
Mortality related to burn injury is associated not with the toxic effect 
of thermally injured skin, but with the metabolic and bacterial con
-
sequences of a large open wound, reduction of the patient’s immune 
response, and malnutrition. These abnormalities set the stage for 
life- threatening bacterial infection originating from the burn wound. 
Thorough early wound cleaning, application of topical antimicrobial 
creams, and early wound excision and grafting promote wound healing 
and	improve	aesthetic	and	functional	outcomes.	Topical	antimicrobial	
agents for burn wound treatment include bacitracin (second- degree 
burns or burns that will heal in a week), silver sulfadiazine cream 
(third- degree burns), mafenide acetate (Sulfamylon) cream (third- 
degree burns on ears, cartilage), or 0.5% silver nitrate solution (third- 
degree burns with sulfa allergy) (
Table	89.7
). Regardless of the choice 
of topical antimicrobial agent, it is essential that all third- degree burn 
tissue be fully excised and grafted before bacterial colonization pro
-
gresses	to	systemic	infection.	Children	with	a	burn	of	>20%	TBSA	
should be housed in reverse isolation with all personnel required to 
wear gown, gloves, mask, and hat to prevent cross- contamination and 
to provide a temperature-  and humidity- controlled environment that 
minimizes hypermetabolism.
Deep	third-	degree	burns	of	>10%	TBSA	benefit	from	early	excision	
and	grafting.	To	improve	outcome,	sequential	excision	and	grafting	of	
DIS
Fig. 89.6
 Tea scald over the chest and shoulder of a child showing 
heterogeneity of burn depth. D, Deep; I, intermediate; S, superficial. 
(
From Enoch S, Roshan A, Shah M. Emergency and early management 
of burns and scalds. BMJ. 2009;338:937–941.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

652 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
third- degree and deep second- degree burns may be required in chil
-
dren with large burns. Prompt excision with immediate wound clo
-
sure is achieved with 
autografts
, skin obtained from another part of 
the patient’s body, which may be meshed to increase the efficiency of 
coverings. Alternatives for wound closure, such as allografts, dermal 
substitutes, and other biologic dressings, may be important for wound 
coverage in patients with extensive injury to limit fluid, electrolyte, and 
protein losses and to reduce pain and minimize temperature loss. Cul
-
tured epidermal cells (autologous keratinocytes), grown from a skin 
biopsy from the patient, are a costly alternative and are not always 
successful. Another approach employs an autologous cell spray (theo
-
retically containing stem cells) as an adjunct to meshed skin for wound 
closure. An experienced burn team can safely perform early stage or 
total excision while burn fluid resuscitation continues. Important keys 
to success are (1) accurate preoperative and intraoperative determi
-
nation of burn depth, (2) the choice of excision area and appropriate 
timing, (3) control of intraoperative blood loss, (4) specific instrumen
-
tation, and (5) the type of wound coverage chosen.
 
Nutritional Support
Supporting the increased energy requirements of a patient with a burn 
is a high priority. The burn injury produces a hypermetabolic response 
characterized by both protein and fat catabolism. Depending on the 
time	lapse	since	the	burn,	children	with	a	burn	of	40%	TBSA	require	
basal energy expenditure (oxygen consumption) approximately 
50–100% higher than predicted for their age. Early excision and grafting 
can decrease the energy requirement. Pain, anxiety, and immobiliza
-
tion increase the physiologic demands. Additional energy expenditure 
is caused by cold stress if environmental humidity and temperature 
are not controlled; this is especially true in young infants, in whom 
the large BSA:mass ratio allows proportionately greater heat loss than 
in adolescents and adults. Providing environmental temperatures of 
28–33°C (82.4–91.4°F), adequate covering during transport, and lib
-
eral use of analgesics and anxiolytics can decrease caloric demands. 
Appropriate sleep intervals are necessary and should be part of the reg
-
imen. Early enteral nutrition, initially with high- carbohydrate, high- 
protein caloric content (1,800 kcal/m
2
/24- hr maintenance plus 2,200 
kcal/m
2
 of burn/24 hr) reduces metabolic stress.
The objective of nutrition supplementation programs is to maintain 
body weight and minimize weight loss by meeting metabolic demands. 
This reduces the loss of lean body mass. Calories are provided at 
approximately 1.5 times the basal metabolic rate, with 3- 4 g/kg of pro
-
tein/day. The focus of nutritional therapy is to support and compen
-
sate for the metabolic needs. Multivitamins, particularly the B vitamin 
group, vitamin C, vitamin A, vitamin D, vitamin E, copper, selenium, 
and zinc, are also necessary.
Alimentation should be started as soon as is practical, preferably 
enterally, to meet all caloric needs and maintain gastrointestinal (GI) 
tract function throughout treatment. Patients with burns of >40% of 
TBSA	need	a	flexible	nasogastric	or	small	bowel	feeding	tube	to	facili
-
tate continuous delivery of calories without the risk of aspiration at 
the	time	of	admission.	To	decrease	the	risk	of	infectious	complica
-
tions, parenteral nutrition should be avoided or discontinued as soon 
as is practical after delivery of sufficient enteral calories is established. 
Continuous GI feeding is essential, even if feeding is interrupted for 
frequent visits to the operating room, until full grafting takes place. 
In third- degree burns >20% the use of anabolic agents such as 
oxan
-
drolone
 to improve wound healing and promote protein synthesis or 
anticatabolic agents (propranolol) to reduce metabolic stress is com
-
mon practice. It is vital to continue enteral feeding while using these 
agents to obtain maximal response. Liver function studies should be 
monitored weekly when giving oxandrolone, and oxandrolone should 
be discontinued if liver function deteriorates.
 
Topical Therapy
Topical	therapy	is	widely	used	to	decrease	wound	colonization	from	
a wide variety of wound pathogens (see 
Table	89.7
). Preferences vary 
among burn units. Each topical agent has advantages and disadvan
-
tages in application, comfort, and bacteriostatic spectrum. However, 
all agents impair wound healing. The type of organism on a wound 
varies with the age of the wound. In the first week, gram- positive 
organisms predominate. During weeks 2- 4, gram- negative organisms 
are frequently found in burn wounds. Prolonged open burn wounds 
eventually tend to develop resistant gram- negative organisms, fun
-
gus, or mold. The choice of topical antimicrobial depends on wound 
age and depth. 
Bacitracin
 is a clear ointment effective against gram- 
positive organisms and is often used in wounds that will heal within 
a week. If placed on nonburned skin, it may cause a yeast rash or 
pimples that resolve with discontinuation. 
Silver sulfadiazine
 is a white 
cream containing silver with a broad spectrum of coverage, including 
Table 89.7 
 
  Topical Agents Used for Burns
AGENT
EFFECTIVENESS
SIDE EFFECTS
EASE OF USE
Bacitracin
Gram- positive organisms; good for 
wounds that will heal in 7- 10 days
May cause yeast overgrowth rash or 
pustules if on intact skin; resolves 
with discontinuation
Clear ointment, 1- 2 times daily, 
easy to clean off
Silver sulfadiazine cream 
(Silvadene)
Broad spectrum including gram- 
positive and - negative organisms, 
some fungus; may cause leukopenia
Leukopenia, self- limited; may be 
painful
Changed twice daily
Leaves adherent residue
Residue 
must
 be washed off with 
each dressing change
Mafenide acetate cream
*
 
(Sulfamylon)
Targets resistant gram- negative 
organisms, particularly 
Pseudomonas,
 
some gram- positive coverage
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, may 
cause metabolic acidosis
Changed twice daily; application 
may be painful
Rapid and deep wound penetration; 
used on cartilage (ears) and deep 
wound infection
Residue 
must
 be washed off with 
each dressing change
0.5% Silver nitrate solution
Bacteriostatic
Permanent staining of surfaces 
from silver oxidation; 
electrolyte disturbances from 
hypotonic solution, potential 
methemoglobinemia
Closed bulky dressing soaked 
every 2 hr and changed 1- 2 times 
daily
Broad spectrum, including some fungi
Superficial penetration
*Mafenide acetate solution at concentrations of 2.5% or 5% for use on heavily colonized, multidrug- resistant organisms to be used for 5 days only.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89
 u 
Burn Injuries 
653
gram- positive and gram- negative organisms and some fungi. It is used 
commonly in deep third- degree burns that require grafting and may 
cause transient self- limiting leukopenia if applied over large areas. 
Mafenide acetate
 is a white cream with the ability to diffuse through 
the burn eschar; it is the treatment of choice for injury to cartilagi
-
nous surfaces, such as the ear. Mafenide acetate solution at a concentra
-
tion of 5% is useful for the treatment of burn wounds that are heavily 
colonized with multidrug- resistant gram- negative bacteria and is often 
used postoperatively to keep grafts moist. The carbonic anhydrase 
inhibition activity of mafenide acetate may cause metabolic acidosis 
if large surface areas are treated in a small child. No sulfa- containing 
agent should be used if the child has a history of sulfa allergies. Silver 
nitrate solution may be used in children with sulfa allergy because of 
its broad spectrum of coverage. However, it causes gray staining of the 
environment and wound from silver oxidation as well as electrolyte 
disturbances because of the hypotonic nature of the solution.
 
Inhalation Injury
Inhalation injury is serious in the infant and child, particularly if pre
-
existing pulmonary conditions are present (see 
Chapter 86
). Inhalation 
injury should be suspected based on history of sustained exposure to 
smoke in association with the burn injury, such as being confined in a 
closed space or from an indoor explosion, with decreased level of con
-
sciousness or with evidence of carbon deposits in the oropharynx or 
nose, singed facial hair, or carbonaceous sputum. Mortality estimates 
vary, depending on the type of inhalation injury and the extent of expo
-
sure. Each of the three types of inhalation injury (toxic gases, upper air
-
way edema, and lower airway injury) has a different treatment.
oxic Gases
Carbon monoxide poisoning from the burning of organic materials is 
caused by displacement of oxygen from the hemoglobin molecule by 
CO, leading to tissue hypoxia (see 
Chapter 94
). CO poisoning should 
be treated with 100% oxygen until carboxyhemoglobin levels drop 
below	10%.	Toxic	fumes,	including	cyanides	from	combustible	plas
-
tics as well as sulfur and nitrogen oxides and alkalis formed during the 
combustion of synthetic fabrics, produce corrosive chemicals that may 
erode the mucosa and cause significant tissue sloughing. Exposure to 
smoke may cause degradation of surfactant and decrease its produc
-
tion, resulting in atelectasis. Inhalation injury and burn injury are syn
-
ergistic, and the combined effect can increase morbidity and mortality.
Injury from gases generally manifests early in the course of treat
-
ment. Acute asphyxia is the leading cause of death at the fire scene and 
can cause anoxic brain injury, particularly in children. Signs of CNS 
injury from hypoxemia caused by asphyxia or CO poisoning vary from 
irritability to depression. CO poisoning may be 
mild,
 with slight dys
-
pnea, headache, nausea, and decreased visual acuity and higher cere
-
bral functions; 
moderate,
 with irritability, agitation, nausea, dimness 
of vision, impaired judgment, and rapid fatigue; or 
severe,
 producing 
confusion, hallucination, ataxia, cardiovascular collapse, acidosis, and 
coma. Measurement of HbCO is important for diagnosis and treat
-
ment.	Pulse	oximetry	is	NOT	a	reliable	marker	of	oxygenation	in	CO	
poisoning. If significant CO exposure is suspected, a blood gas with 
co- oximetry and a HbCO level should be obtained to determine Pa
o
2
 
and CO toxicity extent. CO poisoning and hypoxia are assumed to be 
present until the tests are performed, and patients should receive 100% 
oxygen until the HbCO level is <10% and adequate oxygenation is con
-
firmed. Significant CO poisoning (level >25%) may require hyperbaric 
oxygen therapy; the risk of transporting a burn patient to the hyper
-
baric chamber needs to be carefully considered. 
Cyanide poisoning
 
should be suspected if a metabolic acidosis persists despite adequate 
fluid resuscitation and in environments containing synthetic polymers 
(see 
Chapter 94
). Unless specifically suspected, most burn centers do 
not routinely screen for cyanide poisoning.
 
  
The treatment priority for edema of the upper airway caused by inhala
-
tion injury focuses on establishing and maintaining a patent airway. 
If airway obstruction is apparent, prompt and early nasotracheal or 
orotracheal intubation is indicated to maintain airway patency and 
assure adequate ventilation and oxygenation. The most experienced 
provider should perform the intubation, as edema may allow only 
one attempt. The endotracheal tube size should be chosen carefully, as 
replacement during the first 1- 3 days is often not possible. Endotra
-
cheal tubes should 
not be secured
 with tape if a facial burn is present, as 
the tape will not adhere to the moist surface. The endotracheal tube can 
be secured to a tooth, to the maxilla, or tied in two planes. Monitoring 
the security of the endotracheal tube and assuring it remains in the 
same location at the level of the teeth is essential, as edema may alter 
tube position.
 
 
Intubation and mechanical ventilation may be required in patients who 
have significant hypoxia, hypercarbia, or mental status changes caused 
by smoke inhalation. Wheezing and bronchospasm are common, 
and use of inhaled bronchodilators is often helpful. Smoke inhalation 
injury is gauged via clinical progression and bronchoscopy. Aggressive 
pulmonary toilet and chest physiotherapy are necessary, as casts and 
airway obstruction from debris are common. Extubation should be 
delayed until the patient has adequate oxygenation and ventilation, is 
able to sustain the increased minute ventilation and work of breathing 
that accompanies burn injury, and edema has resolved. A spontane
-
ous breathing trial and a cuff leak test are often used to gauge readi
-
ness for extubation. Children with an anticipated need for mechanical 
ventilation >2 weeks may benefit from tracheostomy, as it provides a 
secure, comfortable airway with decreased sedation requirements. 
Tracheostomy	should	only	be	performed	under	general	anesthesia	by	
experienced surgeons using optimal positioning, proper tracheostomy 
tube size, and hemostatic conditions. In children with deep burns of 
the face, tracheostomy provides a secure airway that facilitates excision 
and grafting yet allows for oral movement, including a pacifier.
Patients with severe inhalation injury or with other causes of respi
-
ratory deterioration that lead to pediatric acute respiratory distress 
syndrome who do not improve with conventional pressure- controlled 
ventilation (progressive oxygenation failure, as manifested by oxygen 
saturation <90% while receiving F
io
2
 of 0.9- 1.0 and positive end- 
expiratory pressure of at least 12 cm H
2
O) may benefit from high- 
frequency ventilation or nitric oxide inhalation treatment. Nitric oxide 
usually is administered through the ventilator at 5 parts per million 
(ppm) and increased to 30 ppm. This method of therapy reduces the 
need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO; see 
Chap
-
ter 86
). ECMO may be indicated for failure of these conventional 
techniques.
 
Pain Relief and Psychologic Adjustment
See 
Chapter 93
.
It is important to provide adequate analgesia, anxiolysis, sedation, 
and psychologic support to reduce early metabolic stress, decrease the 
potential	for	posttraumatic	stress	disorder	(PTSD),	and	allow	future	
stabilization as well as physical and psychologic rehabilitation. Patients 
and family members require team support to work through the griev
-
ing process and accept long- term changes in appearance.
Children with burn injury have frequent and wide fluctuations in 
pain intensity. Appreciation of pain depends on the depth of the burn; 
the stage of healing; the patient’s age, stage of emotional development, 
and cognition; the experience and efficiency of the treating team; the 
use of analgesics and other drugs; the patient’s pain threshold; and 
interpersonal and cultural factors. From the onset of treatment, 
pre
-
emptive pain control
 during dressing changes is crucial. The use of a 
variety of nonpharmacologic interventions and pharmacologic agents 
must be reviewed throughout the treatment period. Opioid analgesia, 
prescribed in an adequate dose and timed to cover dressing changes, 
is essential to comfort management. A supportive person who is 
consistently present and knows the patient profile can integrate and 
encourage patient participation in burn care. The problem of 
under
-
medication
 is most prevalent in adolescents, in whom fear of drug 
dependence may inappropriately influence treatment. A related prob
-
lem is that the child’s specific pain experience may be misinterpreted; 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

654 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
for anxious patients, those who are confused and alone, or those with 
preexisting emotional disorders, even small wounds may illicit intense 
pain. Anxiolytic medication added to the analgesic is usually helpful 
and has more than a synergistic effect. Equal attention is necessary to 
decrease stress in the intubated patient. Other modalities of pain and 
anxiety relief 
(relaxation techniques)
 can decrease the physiologic 
stress response.
A multimodal pain strategy is recommended for burns, as burn 
pain is a combination of background, acute, procedural, neuropathic, 
and inflammatory pain. The specific agents used will vary by institu
-
tion and provider training. 
Background pain,
 which exists primar
-
ily in burns >20%, should be addressed with long- acting oral agents 
administered twice daily, such as methadone or long- acting morphine. 
This helps to maintain a steady state of pain relief. 
Acute pain
 from the 
injury (all burn sizes) is generally treated initially with oral acetamino
-
phen, escalating to a short- acting opioid such as morphine, hydromor
-
phone, oxycodone, or similar agents orally. If oral administration is not 
sufficient (a common scenario in major burn injury), intermittent IV 
opioids are used. The use of 
codeine
 is not recommended because of 
the possibility of ultrarapid metabolism of codeine. 
Procedural pain,
 
such as for dressing changes, is short- lived but severe. Potent IV opi
-
oids such as fentanyl, morphine, or hydromorphone are effective but 
require appropriate monitoring. Naloxone is rarely needed but should 
be immediately available to reverse the effect of IV narcotics. Ketamine 
1- 4 mg/kg IV 
can be employed for children with high opioid require
-
ments; however, continuous cardiovascular monitoring is manda
-
tory, and ketamine should be administered by a provider trained in 
advanced airway techniques. 
Neuropathic pain
 (pins and needles sen
-
sation) should be addressed with scheduled oral gabapentin given 4 
times daily. 
Inflammatory pain
 can be effectively treated with nonste
-
roidal antiinflammatory agents unless the patient has upcoming sur
-
gery, as this may increase surgical complications. 
Midazolam
 is very 
useful for conscious sedation at a dose of 0.01- 0.02 mg/kg for nonintu
-
bated patients and 0.05- 0.1 mg/kg for intubated patients as an IV bolus 
and may be repeated in 10 minutes; if used with an opioid, continuous 
cardiovascular monitoring is warranted. Oral midazolam for premedi
-
cation before a dressing change at 0.5 mg/kg can be highly effective in 
reducing anxiety surrounding dressings. Dexmedetomidine infusion 
may be required for children with high levels of anxiety or who are 
refractory to benzodiazepine therapy, but this requires monitoring in 
an intensive care unit (ICU) setting. Postoperative pain after burn sur
-
gery, which is severe because of the combination of donor sites and the 
wound itself, is often treated with a multimodal continuous infusion 
of an opioid (hydromorphone or morphine) and sedative (dexmedeto
-
midine and/or ketamine). This combination decreases opioid require
-
ments and improves pain but requires monitoring in an ICU. Regional 
blocks by a trained anesthesiologist can mitigate donor site pain.
During the process of weaning from IV analgesics, the dose of opi
-
ates is reduced by 25% over 1- 3 days, sometimes with the addition of 
oral opioids and then acetaminophen as opioids are tapered. When 
weaning off antianxiety medications, the approach involves reducing 
the dose of benzodiazepines, at 25–50% per dose, daily over 1- 3 days.
Regular evaluation of burned children during hospitalization by 
a	trained	psychologist	or	psychiatrist	is	necessary,	as	PTSD,	anxiety,	
depression, acute stress disorder, and other psychiatric issues are com
-
mon after burn injury. Early recognition and treatment of the patient 
and family improve psychosocial outcomes. As a result, there is a grow
-
ing use of 
psychotropic medication
 in the care of children with burns, 
including prescription of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors as 
antidepressants, the use of neuroleptic agents in the critical care set
-
ting,	and	the	treatment	of	PTSD	with	prazosin.
 
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation
To	ensure	maximum	cosmetic	and	functional	outcome,	occupational	
and physical therapy must begin on the day of admission, continue 
throughout hospitalization, and for many patients, continue after dis
-
charge. Physical rehabilitation involves body and limb positioning, 
splinting, exercises (active and passive movement), assistance with 
activities of daily living, and gradual ambulation. These measures 
maintain adequate joint and muscle activity with as normal a range 
of movement as possible after healing or reconstruction. 
Pressure 
therapy
 is necessary to reduce hypertrophic scar formation; a variety 
of prefabricated and custom- made garments are available for use in 
different body areas. These custom- made garments deliver consistent 
pressure on scarred areas; shorten the time of scar maturation; and 
decrease scar thickness, redness, and associated itching. Continued 
adjustments to scarred areas (scar release, grafting, rearrangement) 
and multiple minor cosmetic surgical procedures are necessary to 
optimize long- term function and improve appearance. Replacement 
of areas of alopecia and scarring has been achieved with the use of 
tissue- expander techniques. The use of ultrapulse laser for reduction 
of scarring is an adjunct in scar management. Pruritis can be a severe 
issue in the rehabilitative phase. Commonly used oral agents include 
antihistamines such as loratadine, hydroxyzine, and diphenhydramine, 
as	well	as	gabapentin	or	H2	blockers.	Topical	agents	include	moistur
-
izers, topical steroid creams, or colloidal oatmeal baths. Refractory 
itching may be treated with desensitization therapy or laser treatment, 
although literature supporting these therapies is scarce.
 
School Reentry and Long- Term Outcome
Optimally the child will return to school immediately after discharge. 
Occasionally, a child may need to attend on an altered schedule because 
of rehabilitation needs. It is important for the child to return to the 
normal routine of attending school and being with peers to begin the 
resocialization process. Planning for a return to home and school often 
requires a 
school reentry program
 that is individualized to each child’s 
needs. For a school- age child, planning for the return to school occurs 
simultaneously with planning for discharge. The hospital schoolteacher 
contacts the local school and plans the program with the school faculty, 
nurses, social workers, recreational/child- life therapists, and rehabilita
-
tion therapists. This team should work with students and staff to ease 
anxiety, answer questions, and provide information. Burns and scars 
evoke fears in those who are not familiar with this type of injury and 
can result in a tendency to withdraw from or reject the burned child. 
A school reentry program designed based on the child’s developmental 
and educational needs can alleviate these fears and facilitate the child’s 
reintegration into the school environment.
Major medical advances have made it possible to save the lives of 
children with massive burns. Although some children have lingering 
physical difficulties, most have a satisfactory quality of life. The com
-
prehensive burn care that includes experienced multidisciplinary after
-
care plays an important role in recovery. 
Table	89.8
 lists the long- term 
disabilities and complications of burns.
 
ELECTRICAL BURNS
Three types of burns are caused by electricity: electrical burns, caused 
by electricity passing through the body; arc burns, caused by the heat 
released from high- amperage currents discharging through the air; 
and thermal contact burns, from touching a hot electrical device. 
Electrical burns are divided into high voltage (>1,000 volts) and low 
voltage (<1,000 volts). Electricity is delivered via alternating current 
(AC), which is generally used in households, or direct current (DC), 
often used in industry or car batteries. The majority of pediatric electri
-
cal burns involve 110 volts AC electricity and occur in the household. 
Minor electrical burns
 in children usually occur as a result of biting 
on an extension cord or inserting an object in an electrical outlet. These 
injuries produce localized burns to the mouth or finger. Children who 
chew electrical cords usually sustain burns to portions of the upper and 
lower lips that come in contact with the extension cord, particularly the 
corners of the mouth. Because these are 
nonconductive
 injuries (do not 
extend beyond the site of injury), hospital admission is not necessary. 
Care is focused on the area of the injury visible in the mouth, ensuring 
it is low voltage and does not cause entry or exit wounds or cardiac 
issues.	Treatment	with	topical	antibiotic	creams	is	sufficient	until	the	
patient is seen in a burn unit outpatient department or by a plastic sur
-
geon for potential reconstruction or excision of the burn site.
A more serious category of electrical burn is the 
high- voltage elec
-
trical burn
, for which children must be admitted for observation, 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 89
 u 
Burn Injuries 
655
regardless of the extent of the surface area burn. Deep muscle injury is 
typical and cannot be readily assessed initially. These injuries occur in 
high- voltage installations, such as electric power stations or railroads; 
children climb an electric pole and touch an electric box out of curios
-
ity or accidentally touch a high- tension electrical wire. Such injuries 
have a mortality rate of 3–15% for children who arrive at the hospi
-
tal for treatment. Survivors have a high rate of morbidity, including 
major limb amputations. Points of entry of current through the skin 
and the exit site show characteristic features consistent with current 
density and heat. The majority of entrance wounds involve the upper 
extremity, with small exit wounds in the lower extremity. The current 
is conducted throughout the body, regardless of entry and exit points. 
Virtually any structure in the body is at risk (
Table	89.9
). Damage to 
the abdominal viscera, thoracic structures, and nervous system (con
-
fusion, coma, paralysis) in areas remote from obvious extremity injury 
occurs and must be sought, particularly in injuries with multiple cur
-
rent pathways or those in which the victim falls from a high pole. 
Cardiac abnormalities,
 manifested as ventricular fibrillation or car
-
diac arrest, are common; patients with high- tension electrical injury 
need an initial electrocardiogram (ECG) and cardiac monitoring until 
they are stable and have been fully assessed. Higher- risk patients have 
abnormal ECG findings and a history of loss of consciousness. Renal 
damage from 
deep muscle necrosis
 and subsequent myoglobinuria is 
another complication; such patients need forced alkaline diuresis to 
minimize renal damage. Soft tissue (muscle) injury of an extremity 
may produce a 
compartment syndrome
 (see 
Chapter 80
). Aggressive 
removal of all dead and devitalized tissue, even with the risk of func
-
tional loss, remains the key to effective management of the electrically 
damaged extremity. Early debridement facilitates early closure of the 
wound. Damaged major vessels must be isolated and buried in a viable 
muscle to prevent exposure. Survival depends on immediate intensive 
care; functional result depends on long- term care and delayed recon
-
structive surgery. The incidence of cataract formation is also increased 
in patients who have sustained electrical injuries; patients should be 
referred to an ophthalmologist for regular examinations.
Arc burns
 generally are caused by clothing 
ignition
 from the super
-
heated arc that can be emitted from high- amperage current discharge. 
The hallmark of this injury is a large cutaneous burn following clothing 
lines and covered in thick soot. Discreet entrance and exit points are 
not generally seen. Muscle injury is rare, as current does not actually 
traverse	the	skin.	Treatment	should	follow	the	principles	for	major	
flame burn injury treatment.
Contact burns
, in which tissue destruction is localized to a small 
area of contact with an electrical box with no evidence of electricity 
conducted through the body, are generally treated as any other burn 
injury. Careful history and physical examination should be performed 
to assure that there was no transmission of electricity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
89.1
 Lightning Burns
Tina L. Palmieri
Worldwide, lightning occurs approximately 50 times per second, pri
-
marily via ground strikes involving 30,000- 100,000 amperes at 30,000 
Kelvin temperature. Fortunately, the incidence of lightning burns is low, 
with 400 injuries and 40 deaths per year attributed to lightning. Light
-
ning injury occurs via (1) direct strike (electrical current), (2) thermal 
burns from conversion of electrical energy to heat, or (3) mechanical 
trauma from the acoustic shock wave, flying debris, fall, or muscle con
-
traction. The most common form of lightning burn, accounting for 
approximately half of lightning injuries, is 
ground current
, in which 
lightning strikes the ground or an object near an individual and trav
-
els through the ground to the individual. 
Side splash
 injuries consti
-
tute 
∼
30% of lightning injuries and occurs when current jumps from a 
nearby object, then follows the path of least resistance to an individual. 
Direct strikes account for 5% of lightning injuries. Sudden death after a 
direct strike is due to simultaneous cardiac and respiratory arrest from 
depolarization of cardiac muscle cells and paralysis of the medullary 
respiratory center.
Lightning cutaneous burns depend on the current path, the type of 
clothing worn, the presence of metal, and cutaneous moisture. Entry, 
exit, and path lesions are possible; the prognosis is poorest for lesions 
of the head or legs. Internal organ injury along the path is common 
able 89.8 
 
  Common Long- Term Complications and Disabilities in Patients with Burn Injuries
COMPLICATIONS AFFECTING THE SKIN AND SOFT TISSUE
Hypertrophic scars
Susceptibility to minor trauma
Dry skin
Contractures
Itching and neuropathic pain
Alopecia
Chronic open wounds
Skin cancers
Epidermal inclusion cysts
Cutaneous abscesses
ORTHOPEDIC DISABILITIES
Amputations
Contractures
Heterotopic ossification
Temporary reduction in bone density
Decreased endurance and weakness
METABOLIC DISABILITIES
Heat sensitivity
Obesity
Glucose intolerance
Hypertension
PSYCHIATRIC AND NEUROLOGIC DISABILITIES
Sleep disorders
Adjustment disorders
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Depression
Body image issues
Neuropathy and neuropathic pain
Long- term neurologic effects of carbon monoxide poisoning
Anoxic brain injury
LONG- TERM COMPLICATIONS OF CRITICAL CARE
Deep vein thrombosis, venous insufficiency, or varicose veins
Tracheal stenosis, vocal cord disorders, or swallowing disorders
Renal or adrenal dysfunction
Hepatobiliary or pancreatic disease
Cardiovascular disease
Reactive airway disease or bronchial polyposis
PREEXISTING DISABILITIES THAT CONTRIBUTED TO THE 
 
INJURIES
Risk- taking behavior
Untreated or poorly treated psychiatric disorder
Modified from Sheridan RL, Schultz JT, Ryan CM, et al. Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Weekly clinicopathological exercises. Case 6- 2004: A 35- year- old woman 
with extensive, deep burns from a nightclub fire. 
N Engl J Med
. 2004;350:810–821.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

656 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
and 
does not
 relate to the severity of the cutaneous burn. Linear burns, 
usually first-  or second- degree, are in the locations where sweat is pres
-
ent. 
Feathering
, also called 
Lichtenberg figures,
 is an arborescent pat
-
tern appearing on the skin and is pathognomonic for lightning injury 
(
Fig. 89.7
). The feathering skin appearance, thought to be caused by 
changes in cutaneous blood flow, is transient and disappears within 
several hours. Lightning may ignite clothing or produce serious cuta
-
neous burns from heated metal in the clothing. Internal complications 
of lightning burns include cardiac arrest caused by asystole, transient 
hypertension, premature ventricular contractions, ventricular fibril
-
lation, and myocardial ischemia. Most severe cardiac complications 
resolve if the patient is supported with CPR (see 
Chapter 79
). CNS 
complications include cerebral edema, hemorrhage, seizures, mood 
changes, depression, and paralysis of the lower extremities. Rhabdo
-
myolysis and myoglobinuria (with possible renal failure) also occur but 
are rare. Ocular manifestations include vitreous hemorrhage, iridocy
-
clitis, retinal tearing, or retinal detachment. Rupture of the tympanic 
membrane occurs in 50–80% of those sustaining a direct strike.
Treatment	of	lightning	injury	generally	follows	traditional	trauma	
management with one exception: In the event of multiple lighting inju
-
ries (mass casualty), a “reverse triage” system is employed, in which 
initial treatment is focused on those who appear to be in cardiac arrest, 
Table 89.9 
 
  Electrical Injury: Clinical Considerations
SYSTEM
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
MANAGEMENT
General
—
	•		Extricate	the	patient
	•		Perform	ABCs	of	resuscitation;	immobilize	the	spine
	•		Obtain	history:	voltage,	type	of	current
	•		Obtain	complete	blood	count	with	platelets,	electrolytes,	BUN,	
 
creatinine, and glucose
Cardiac
Dysrhythmias: asystole, ventricular fibrillation, 
sinus tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, premature 
atrial contractions, premature ventricular 
 
contractions, conduction defects, atrial 
 
fibrillation, ST- and T-wave changes
	•		Treat	dysrhythmias
	•		Provide	cardiac	monitor,	electrocardiogram,	and	radiographs	with	
suspected thoracic injury
	•		Perform	creatinine	phosphokinase	with	isoenzyme	measurements	if	
indicated
Pulmonary
Respiratory arrest, acute respiratory distress, 
aspiration syndrome
	•		Protect	and	maintain	the	airway
	•		Provide	mechanical	ventilation	if	indicated,	chest	radiograph,	and	
 
arterial blood gas levels
Renal
Acute kidney injury, myoglobinuria
	•		Provide	aggressive	fluid	management	unless	central	nervous	system	
injury is present
	•		Maintain	adequate	urine	output,	>1	mL/kg/hr	if	myoglobinuria;	
addition of HCO
3
−
, mannitol may be needed to alkalinize urine and 
stimulate diuresis, respectively
	•		Consider	central	venous	or	pulmonary	artery	pressure	monitoring
	•		Measure	urine	myoglobin;	perform	urinalysis;	measure	BUN,	creatinine
Neurologic
Immediate: loss of consciousness, motor 
 
paralysis, visual disturbances, amnesia, 
 
agitation; intracranial hematoma
	•		Treat	seizures
	•		Provide	fluid	restriction	if	indicated
Secondary: pain, paraplegia, brachial plexus 
injury, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
hormone secretion, autonomic disturbances, 
cerebral edema
	•		Consider	spine	radiographs	and	MRI,	especially	cervical
Delayed: paralysis, seizures, headache, peripheral 
neuropathy
	•		Perform	CT	or	MRI	scan	of	the	brain	if	indicated
Cutaneous/oral
Oral commissure burns, tongue and dental 
injuries; skin burns resulting from ignition of 
clothes, entrance and exit burns, and arc burns
	•		Document	entrance	and	exit	wounds
	•		Treat	cutaneous	burns;	determine	patient’s	tetanus	status
	•		Obtain	consultation	for	plastic	surgery	of	ear,	nose,	and	throat,	if	indicated
Electrical burns to mouth could include oral 
commissures and lips; low- voltage electrical 
burns secondary to high conductivity of saliva
	•		Ensure	no	entry	or	exit	wounds	and	no	cardiac	involvement
	•		Confirm	all	injuries	are	localized
•		Management	is	observation	until	eschar	sloughs	off	and	granulation	
tissue fills in
•		If	bleeding	at	corner	of	mouth	from	labial	artery,	pinch	lower	lip	to	stop	
bleeding and consult surgeon
	•		High	risk	for	scarring;	refer	to	burn	center	for	long-	term	management
Abdominal
Viscus perforation and solid- organ damage; ileus; 
abdominal injury rare without visible abdominal 
burns
	•		Place	nasogastric	tube	if	patient	has	airway	compromise	or	ileus
	•		Obtain	serum	ALT,	AST,	amylase,	BUN,	and	creatinine	measurements	
and CT scans as indicated
Musculoskeletal
Compartment syndrome from subcutaneous 
necrosis limb edema and deep burns
	•		Monitor	patient	for	possible	compartment	syndrome
Long- bone fractures, spine injuries
	•		Obtain	radiographs	and	orthopedic/general	surgery	consultations	as	
indicated
Ocular
Visual changes, optic neuritis, cataracts, 
 
extraocular muscle paresis
	•		Obtain	an	ophthalmology	consultation	to	document	and	follow	for	
cataract formation
AST, Aspartate transaminase; ALT, alanine transaminase; BUN, blood urea nitrogen.
Adapted from Hall ML, Sills RM. Electrical and lightning injuries. In: Barkin RM, ed. 
Pediatric Emergency Medicine
. St Louis: Mosby; 1997: p. 484.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 90
 u 
Cold Injuries 
657
which is often reversible. Early attention to ventilation after restoration 
of cardiac rhythm in lightning- injured patients is crucial to prevent 
recurrent cardiovascular collapse and hypoxic brain injury. This triage 
algorithm is employed because those who have cardiorespiratory func
-
tion immediately after the strike rarely succumb to their injury before 
hospital arrival. Ultimate outcomes depend on injury severity, mental 
status, organ involvement, cardiac arrest presence, and arrhythmias. 
Lightning survivors who have a normal ECG and normal vital signs and 
no obvious injury can be discharged home if they 
do not
 have history of 
a direct strike, loss of consciousness, focal neurologic complaint, major 
trauma, significant burns, or chest pain or dyspnea. However, they should 
be referred for ophthalmologic evaluation and audio- vestibular evalua
-
tion should there be ocular or otic injury. Neurologic effects of lightning 
injury may be significant. CNS dysfunction can be immediate or delayed 
and includes spinal cord injury, ischemic stroke, or 
keraunoparalysis
 
(temporary condition that mimics spinal cord injury) as well as trauma- 
related injuries such as skull fractures or spinal cord injury. Personality 
alterations and sleep disorders may develop over time post injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Fig. 89.7
 Lightning burn: Lichtenberg feathering. (
Courtesy Dr. Mary 
Ann Cooper.
)
Children and youth are exposed to cold environments through out
-
door recreation, occupational activities, or housing crises. Although 
cold injuries are commonly attributed to subfreezing temperatures, it 
is a misnomer that it must be below 0°C (32°F) for systemic injury or 
local tissue damage to occur. Injury from cold occurs when the body’s 
ability to generate heat is overwhelmed by environmental loss.
MECHANISMS OF HEAT TRANSFER
Environmental heat or cold injury occurs when the metabolic capacity 
for thermoregulation cannot maintain core body temperature in the 
setting of extreme environmental temperatures. The hypothalamus 
Chapter 
90
Cold Injuries
Jennifer Dow
controls the production and conservation of heat, responding to 
central and peripheral receptors. Local skin temperature is partially 
responsible for the regulation of peripheral blood flow. Heat produc
-
tion is a product of cellular metabolism and by both voluntary (exer
-
cise) and involuntary (shivering) muscle use, while vasoconstriction 
and behavioral action influence conservation. Heat is transferred to the 
environment by five mechanisms: radiation, conduction, convection, 
respiration, and evaporation.
Radiation
 is the transfer of heat from one object to another without 
physical contact. This type of heat loss is moderated by vasoconstric
-
tion, diminishing warm blood flow to the periphery, and behavioral 
adaptation of wearing insulating layers. Medications or conditions that 
prohibit the vasoconstrictive response contribute to heat loss by radia
-
tion. Children may not have the knowledge or experience to recognize 
when additional clothing is necessary; adults are obliged to ensure that 
appropriate clothing is available. In a dry environment, radiation is the 
predominant method of heat transfer. 
Conduction
 is the direct trans
-
fer of heat to another object and is the primary mechanism of heat 
loss when a body is immersed, as water has up to 30 times more ther
-
mal conductivity than air. Heat is also conducted when an individual 
touches a cold object (e.g., a cold rock, snow, metal chair). Behavioral 
adaptations include avoidance and placement of insulation between 
the individual and the surface. 
Convective
 loss of body heat to cooler 
circulating air or water can be mitigated by clothing and vasoconstric
-
tion. Convection is a method of rewarming, using hot air as a delivery 
method. 
Evaporative
 heat loss results from the conversion of water 
(sweat) to vapor; like 
respiratory
 loss
,
 it is a small but obligate contribu
-
tion to thermal balance.
HYPOTHERMIA
Accidental hypothermia is the unintentional drop in core temperature 
below 35°C (95°F), occurring when the combination of physiologic 
and behavioral mechanisms to maintain core temperature are over
-
whelmed by environmental losses. Although cold and wet environ
-
ments pose the most significant risk, accidental hypothermia can occur 
in any season and in most climates. The predominant clinical manifes
-
tations are reflective of disruptions of the cardiopulmonary and central 
nervous systems (
Table	90.1
). Cerebral function begins to diminish at a 
core temperature of 33–34°C (91.4–93.2°F), with early manifestations 
being irritability, confusion, and poor decision- making, progressing 
to lethargy, somnolence, and coma. Cerebral oxygen requirements 
are decreased by cooling, affording transient protection in cardiac 
standstill or cold- water drowning events. The initial cardiopulmonary 
response to cold is an increase in cardiac output and ventilation to sup
-
port the metabolic demand of shivering. Further cardiac cooling mani
-
fests as bradycardia and abnormalities of cardiac conduction (atrial 
and ventricular dysrhythmias, including fibrillation) (
Fig. 90.1
). The 
crucial factors for reducing morbidity and mortality due to hypother
-
mia are prevention, prompt recognition, and rapid treatment.
Risk Factors and Prevention of Hypothermia
The	risk	factors	associated	with	hypothermia	are	extensive.	Ill
-
nesses, medications, and substance use can disrupt the normal phys
-
iologic responses to cold. Vasoconstriction is disrupted by ethanol, 
vasodilatory medications, and infections. Central nervous system 
(CNS) trauma, stroke, medications (antidepressants, mood stabi
-
lizers, anxiolytics), and endocrine disorders (hypothyroid, adrenal 
insufficiency, diabetes, hypoglycemia, hypopituitarism) disrupt the 
hypothalamic response to cold. Mental illness, intoxication (opi
-
ates, organophosphates, barbiturates, carbon monoxide), and lack 
of awareness, as seen in the extremes of age, may impair the ability 
to recognize cold. General conditions of malnutrition and inabil
-
ity to move make it such that the patient does not have the caloric 
reserves to shiver or cannot move safely out of the cold. Autonomic 
dysfunction may produce hypothermia. Knowledge of these condi
-
tions ideally results in a heightened attentiveness to the potential for 
hypothermia. Active prevention includes awareness of the weather 
conditions and the utilization of appropriate clothing. Insulation 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

658 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
and ease of layering are factors to be considered when choosing 
clothing. Removing a layer while engaging in aerobic activity helps 
prevent sweating and subsequent evaporative heat loss; replacing 
it when activity slows prevents loss by radiation through the inad
-
equate insulation. Socks and gloves should fit properly, without 
circulatory impingement, and be constructed of materials other 
than cotton. Covering the head and face prevents losses through 
these exposed areas. Infants and young children will lose more heat 
by radiation through the head than adults because of its relatively 
increased	surface	area.	The	utilization	of	wind-	blocking	materials	
mitigates loss due to convection, and waterproofing keeps clothing 
dry and minimizes losses resulting from convection and radiation. 
Additional preventative measures are ensuring adequate nutrition 
for the activity, recognizing an increased metabolic demand in the 
cold, and having access to shelter for warmth.
 
Clinical Presentation of Hypothermia
Hypothermia is a cold injury syndrome with progressive signs and 
symptoms (see 
Table	90.1
 and 
Fig. 90.2
).	The	differential	diagno
-
sis is broad, and the clinician must be aware of the environment 
from which the patient presents. It is also essential that the clinician 
recognize that each patient is unique and presents with subtle dif
-
ferences. A patient may continue to shiver below the 30°C (86°F) 
“cut- off” but manifest all other signs of moderate to severe hypo
-
thermia. Standard classification is based on measured core temper
-
ature, whereas field classification is based on signs and symptoms 
(see 
Fig. 90.2
).	Treatment	of	all	stages	includes	preventing	further	
heat loss and initiating rewarming (
Fig. 90.3
).
 
Table 90.1 
 
  Physiologic Characteristics of the Four Zones of Hypothermia
STATE
CORE TEMPERATURE °C (°F)
CHARACTERISTICS
Mild
35 (95)
Urine temperature, 34.8°C (94.6°F); increased shivering thermogenesis; increase in metabolic 
rate
34 (93.2)
Amnesia and dysarthria develop; normal blood pressure; maximum respiratory stimulation
33 (91.4)
Ataxia, apathy develop
Moderate
32 (89.6)
Stupor; 25% decrease in oxygen consumption
31 (87.8)
Decreased shivering thermogenesis
30 (86)
Atrial fibrillation and other dysrhythmias; poikilothermia; pulse and cardiac output two- thirds 
normal; insulin ineffective
29 (85.2)
Progressive decrease in level of consciousness, pulse, and respiration; pupils dilated
Severe
28 (82.4)
Ventricular fibrillation susceptibility; 50% decrease in oxygen consumption and pulse
27 (80.6)
Losing reflexes and voluntary motion
26 (78.8)
Major acid- base disturbances; no reflexes or response to pain
25 (77)
Cerebral blood flow one- third normal; cardiac output 45% normal; pulmonary edema may 
develop
24 (75.2)
Significant hypotension
23 (73.4)
No corneal or oculocephalic reflexes
22 (71.6)
Maximum risk of ventricular fibrillation; 75% decrease in oxygen consumption
Profound
20 (68)
Lowest resumption of cardiac electromechanical activity; pulse 20% of normal
19 (66.2)
Flat electroencephalogram
18 (64.4)
Asystole develops
14.2 (57.6)
Lowest accidental hypothermia survival in an infant
13.7 (56.7)
Lowest accidental hypothermia survival in an adult
9 (48.2)
Lowest therapeutic hypothermia survival
From Zafren K, Danzl DF. Accidental hypothermia. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS, Gausche- Hill M, et al., eds. 
Rosen’s Emergency Medicine
, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, 
Table 
132.1
, p. 1744.
J
Fig. 90.1
 Characteristic J or Osborne wave of hypothermia (temp 
<32°C) closely follows QRS. It may be mistaken for a T wave with narrow 
QT interval if the true T wave is not appreciated. The slightly rounded 
peak distinguishes it from R
′
 of bundle branch block. (
From Gunnarsson 
B, Heard CMB. Accidental hypothermia. In: Zimmerman JJ, Clark RSB, 
Fuhrman BP, et al., eds. Fuhrman & Zimmerman’s Pediatric Critical Care, 
6th ed. Elsevier: Philadelphia; 2022: 
Fig. 114.1
, p. 1333.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 90
 u 
Cold Injuries 
659
Cold Stress
Cold stress is marked by shivering and a core temperature >35°C 
(95°F). Measures to prevent further heat loss and increase heat produc
-
tion are all that are necessary for reversal. This may entail increasing 
physical activity to generate warmth, relocating to a warm environ
-
ment, or adding clothing layers.
 
Mild Hypothermia
Patients with mild hypothermia are conscious and alert with measured 
core temperatures of 32–35°C (89.6–95°F). Most will shiver, even vio
-
lently, if there are enough energy reserves. As the core temperature 
drops, the patient may begin to demonstrate discoordination or loss 
of fine motor control. Hemodynamic parameters are generally stable, 
with tachycardia and tachypnea observed due, in part, to the increased 
catecholamine response and support of the metabolic demands of shiv
-
ering. Protection from further heat loss, removal and replacement of 
wet clothing, and calorie replacement should be initiated simultane
-
ously. Application of insulation (e.g., sleeping bag) and a vapor bar
-
rier will optimize passive rewarming. Active external rewarming can 
be initiated using hot water bottles or rewarming heat packs applied 
to	the	neck,	chest,	upper	torso,	axilla,	and	groin.	Try	to	avoid	burns	to	
exposed skin. Patients with mild hypothermia retain consciousness but 
may	demonstrate	diminished	alertness.	Transport	for	further	evalua
-
tion and observation is recommended if they do not return to full alert
-
ness and function in the field.
 
Moderate Hypothermia
Moderate hypothermia, with core temperatures of 28–32°C (82.4–
89.6°F), is the slowing phase of symptom progression. Patients pres
-
ent with bradycardia, respiratory depression, and altered mental status, 
manifesting as depressed level of consciousness, often stuporous, and 
hyporeflexia. Shivering generally stops at 30°C (86°F), but there is 
variation among patients. Active external rewarming should be initi
-
ated with heat applied to the upper torso, chest, axilla, and back. Fluid 
replacement is initiated with intravenous fluids, ideally containing glu
-
cose, warmed to 40–42°C (104–107.6°F). Cardiac monitoring is indi
-
cated, as a cold heart and hypothermia- associated acidosis increases 
the risk of unstable arrhythmias. Hemodynamically stable patients may 
be transported to any hospital; however, if unstable, a hospital with 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is recommended.
 
Severe/Profound Hypothermia
Core temperatures <28°C (82.4°F) are characterized by stupor, lead
-
ing to coma with loss of cerebrovascular autoregulation. Further car
-
diovascular instability manifests as bradycardia, hypotension, and 
a significant risk for unstable tachycardias, often beginning as atrial 
fibrillation with progression to ventricular dysrhythmias. There is no 
coordinated musculoskeletal activity. Patients with severe hypothermia 
may appear dead. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should be ini
-
tiated if there is no cardiac activity, as determined by a pulse check of 
at least 1 minute duration or the absence of organized electrical activity 
on a monitor. Bedside echocardiography may also be used to identify 
cardiac activity. Vasoactive medications should be held until the core 
temperature is >30°C (86°F) and then administered at twice the dosing 
interval until 35°C (95°F). Defibrillation or cardioversion, if indicated, 
is attempted once, at maximum power, then held until the core tem
-
perature is above 30°C (86°F).
In hypothermic cardiac arrest, rescuers should initiate CPR regard
-
less of the patient’s temperature. Contraindications to initiation of CPR 
include if there is obvious fatal injury, ice or snow is visualized in the 
airway, chest wall compression is impossible, or rescuers are at risk. The 
usual	signs	of	death—rigor,	pupillary	dilation,	and	lividity—are	unreli
-
able in the hypothermic patient.
Complications of hypothermia include compartment syndrome, 
rhabdomyolysis, hyperkalemia or hypokalemia, hemoconcentration, 
hypercoagulability, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 
confusion	(paradoxical	undressing),	Takotsubo	cardiomyopathy,	and	
mydriasis. Core temperature 
afterdrop
 is a decrease in core tempera
-
ture after removal from the cold and/or when external rewarming 
begins; external rewarming extremities with frostbite is another risk 
factor.
Hypothermia is fatal if not treated. Prevention and risk mitiga
-
tion through awareness of weather conditions, appropriate cloth
-
ing and layering systems, and breaks for rewarming during outdoor 
activities will limit its incidence. Adults supervising children and 
adolescents participating in outdoor activities must be aware that 
behavior changes and apparent clumsiness might signal the onset of 
hypothermia.
 
SOFT TISSUE COLD INJURY
Soft tissue injuries caused by cold are divided into freezing and non
-
freezing injuries. Frostbite is a freezing injury, whereas frostnip, chil
-
blains (pernio), cold immersion, and cold- induced fat necrosis are 
nonfreezing injuries.
 
FROSTBITE
Frostbite is an injury occurring at or below freezing temperatures. 
It can have devastating effects with tissue loss leading to functional 
debility. It is preventable. Frostbite, like hypothermia, is a condition 
occurring when tissue heat loss is greater than the warmth delivered 
by peripheral perfusion. Minimizing exposure to cold, either by 
avoidance, use of appropriate clothing, and responding to changing 
conditions appropriately, are keys to frostbite prevention. Clothing, 
especially hand and footwear, should insulate well and not be con
-
stricting. Vasoconstriction inhibits peripheral cutaneous warming. 
Inhibitors of peripheral perfusion, such as vasoconstricting medica
-
tions, circulatory disorders (e.g., Raynaud syndrome), and chronic 
skin conditions (e.g., psoriasis), increase frostbite risk. Emollients 
applied to the skin do not protect from the cold. Any complaints of 
numbness are to be taken seriously, and the child should be assessed 
for signs of cold injury in a protected environment. Frostnip, although 
not a freezing injury, does indicate that the temperature and exposure 
conditions may promote frostbite.
Prehospital Assessment of a Cold Patient1. From outside ring to center assess Consciousness,    Movement, Shivering, Alertness2. Assess whether normal function, or impaired or no function3. Treat according to appropriate result-quadrant   1. Reduce heat    loss (e.g., add    dry clothing)2. Provide    high-calorie
    food or drink 1. Treat as Moderate Hypothermia, and1. Handle gently2. Keep horizontal3. No standing/walking4. No drink or food5. Insulate/      vapor barrier6. Heat applied to    upper trunk7. Volume    replacement    with warm
    intravenous fluid
8. Evacuate carefullya) IF no obvious vital signs,THEN 60-second breathing / THEN Start CPRpulse checkb) IF no breathing / pulse,2. Evacuate carefully ASAP   1. Handle gently2. Keep horizontal3. No standing/    walking for at    least 30 min.4. lnsulate/     vapour barrier 5. Heat applied to    upper trunk
6. High-calorie    food/drink
7. Monitor until    improvement
    (at least 30 min.)8. Evacuate if no    improvement   3. Increase heat    production
    (e.g., exercise) 
Fig. 90.2
 Algorithm for field assessment and treatment of a cold pa
-
tient. (
Sources: BICOrescue.com; Zafren K, Giesbrecht GG, Danzl DF, et 
al. Wilderness Medical Society practice guidelines for the out-of-hospi
-
tal evaluation and treatment of accidental hypothermia: 2014 update. 
Wilderness Environ Med. 2014;25(4 Suppl):S66-S85.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

660 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
SuspecthypothermiaNormal mentalstatus?Signs of life ororganized rhythmon ECG?
Respiration/pulse
check for up to 1 minShivering?Shivering?Functioningnormally/ableto care for self?YesYesYesNoNoNoYesConscious?NoNoYesYesLethal injury? orChest too stiff forCPR? orAvalanche burial
>35 min and airwayobstructed by snow?YesNoNoEnsure Scene SafetyHandle gently. Keep horizontal.Stabilize injuries. Consider causes of altered mental status other than hypothermia.Severe/Profound Hypothermia <28°CTreat as aboveIntubate or use supraglottic device.Anesthetic and paralytic drugs: Lower dosage and extend
dosing interval below 30°C.
• Ventilation: With advanced airway, ventilate at half standard (normothermic) rate.• Without advanced airway, ventilate at standard rate or use ETCO2 to guide ventilation.• Use supplemental O2, especially above 2500 m.• Naso/orogastric tube if advanced airway in place.
CPR if no signs of life. (Can use cardiac monitor, ETCO2,US to confirm)
• Chest compressions at standard normothermic rate.• If H1102130°C VT or VF or AED advises shock: one shock at max power.• Warm 1–2°C or H1102230°C prior to additional shocks.• No vasoactive drugs until 30°C or above. From 30–35°C, increase dosing interval to twice as long as normal.• CPR may be delayed or given intermittently if necessary to accomplish evacuation.• No temperature cut-off for CPR.
No CPR if signs of life or perfusing rhythm (unless nocardiac activity on US).Consider transcutaneous pacing if bradycardic withhypotension.
Terminate CPR if potassium >12.Hospital with ICUand ECCcapabilities if
possible.During TransportHandle gently.Keep horizontal.Continuerewarming. Warmambulance or
helicopter to 24°C if
possible.Moderate Hypothermia 28–32°CTreat as aboveActive warming: apply heat to upper torso: chest, axillaand back. Use large heat pads, HPMK, Norwegian HeatPac, forced-air.
Monitor. Circulatory access: peripheral IV or IO or femoralline.
Volume replacement: 40–42°C saline boluses. IV or IOglucose.
No standing or walking.Hemodynamically
stable: closesthospital.
Otherwise:
hospital with ICU.
Hospital with ICUand ECCcapabilities if
possible.Mild Hypothermia 32–35°CProtect from further cooling using insulation and vaporbarrier.
Seek shelter. Remove (cut off) wet clothing only withshelter.
Measure temperature if possible.Passive warming: Support shivering with caloriereplacement.After protected from heat loss: No standing or walking for30 min.
Active warming is beneficial. (See moderate hypothermia,below.)Cold Stressed - Not Hypothermic >35°CReduce heat loss, increase heat production.DeathDo not resuscitate.Not HypothermicUninjured, alert
and shivering:
may not need
hospital.
Trauma patients:
active rewarming,
trauma center.Asphyxiated
patients: closesthospital forobservation.
Fig. 90.3
 Recommendations for out- of- hospital evaluation and treatment of accidental hypothermia. AED, Automatic external defibrillator; CPR, 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation; ECC, extracorporeal circulation; ECG, electrocardiogram; ETCO
2
, end- tidal carbon dioxide; HPMK, Hypothermia 
Prevention Management Kit; ICU, intensive care unit; IO, intraosseous; IV, intravenous; US, ultrasound; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular 
tachycardia. (
From Zafren K, Giesbrecht GG, Danzl DF, et al. Wilderness Medical Society practice guidelines for the out- of- hospital evaluation and 
treatment of accidental hypothermia: 2014 update. Wilderness Environ Med. 2014;25:S66–S85, 
Fig. 2.
)
Table 90.2 
 
  Different Degrees of Frostbite and Their Physiologic Characteristics
GRADE I INJURY
GRADE II INJURY
GRADE III INJURY
GRADE IV INJURY
	•		Superficial
	•		Edema	and	redness	without	tissue	
necrosis in the affected area
	•		Numbness,	firm	white-	yellow	
plaque
	•		No	blisters	or	necrosis
	•		Occasional	skin	desquamation	
(5- 10 days later)
	•		Blister	formation
	•		Erythema,	substantial	edema
	•		Vesicles	with	clear	or	milky	
fluid
	•		Blisters
	•		Desquamation	and	black	
eschar formed
	•		Tissue	necrosis
	•		Hemorrhagic	deeper	
blisters
	•		Skin	necrosis
	•		Blue-	gray	discoloration
	•		Development	of	gangrene,	
requiring amputation
	•		Full-	thickness	skin,	subcutaneous	
tissue, muscle, tendon, and bone 
freezing
	•		Little	edema
	•		Initially	mottled,	deep	red	or	
eventually dry, black, and mummified
Modified from Joshi K, Goyary D, Mazumder B, et al. Frostbite: Current status and advancements in therapeutics. 
J Therm Biol
. 2020;93:102716, 
Table 1.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 90
 u 
Cold Injuries 
661
Pathophysiology of Frostbite
Frostbite is a freezing injury with four phases: prefreeze, freeze- thaw, 
vascular stasis, and late ischemic. The degree of cold, duration of 
exposure, and physiologic compromise caused by medications and 
underlying illness determine how severe the injury will be. The tissue 
cooling of 
prefreeze
 is marked by local vasoconstriction and ischemia 
without the formation of ice crystals. Intracellular and extracellular ice 
crystal development causes cellular damage during the 
freeze- thaw 
phase
. Reperfusion leads to ischemic- reperfusion injury and initiation 
of the inflammatory cascade. 
Vascular stasis
 is characterized by both 
blood leaking from vessels and the formation of thrombi. Progressive 
tissue ischemia from micro- emboli, local thrombosis, and persistent 
Fig. 90.4
 Frostbite with clear vesiculations. (
Courtesy Dr. Bill Mills.
)
Fig. 90.5
 Early appearance of severe frostbite of the hand after thaw
-
ing. A purple color and absence of blisters are very unfavorable prog
-
nostic signs. (
Courtesy Dr. Ken Zafren.
)
Wound care• Do not break blisters and do not aspirate hemorrhagic bullae• Broken blisters should be debrided,
 cleaned and covered with an antimicrobial• Pain control medication should be
 administered (aspirin/ibuprofen)
On-field medical care
Special medical procedures• Sympathetic nerve block for vasodilatation and increased blood flow
Rewarming• Rapid rewarming in 37–39°C water bath for 30 minutes (should be done if no further refreezing is ensured)• Tetanus prophylaxis
Therapeutic treatment
Adjuvant therapy• Vasodilator such as papaverine to reduce vasospasm• Antiplatelet drug: Pentoxifylline
• Aloe vera (topical)
Anticoagulant therapy• Heparin
Synthetic analogue of prostacyclin PGI2• Iloprost (used when thrombolytics are contraindicated or ineffective)
Thrombolytic therapy in frostbite• Intra-arterial thrombolysis using tissue plasminogen activator within 24 hours of injury
Active rewarming
Immediate medical care
External• Heated jacket systems• Forced air systems
InternalInvasive:Non-invasive:• Administration of  warm IV fluid• Extracorporeal blood
 warming• Arteriovenous
 rewarming• Hemodialysis
Passive rewarmingPreserve body heatEg. Using blankets
sdus–
 Treatment protocol for the management of frostbite. (
Modified from Joshi K, Goyary D, Mazumder B, et al. Frostbite: Current status and 
advancements in therapeutics. J Therm Biol. 2020;93:102716, 
Fig. 2.
)
AB
Fig. 90.7
 
A,
 Perniosis (chilblains). Edematous, red, painful nodules ap
-
peared on the fingers after exposure to cold. 
B,
 Perniosis (chilblains). 
Note the inflamed nodules on the toes of this adolescent girl. Although 
nodules resolved, painful nodules continued to develop on an annual 
basis beginning in January and lasting until April. She was otherwise 
healthy. (
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatol
-
ogy, 6th ed. Elsevier: Philadelphia; 2022, 
Figs. 20.48
 and 20.49, p. 566.
)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

662 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
reperfusion injury marks the 
late- ischemic phase
. Compromise of 
microcirculation and cellular destruction from crystal formation are 
the main factors contributing to cellular death.
 
Clinical Presentation of Frostbite
The	depth	of	injury	is	the	basis	for	the	classification	of	frostbite	
injury. In the field, frostbite is classified as superficial or deep. Upon 
arrival to a healthcare facility, a degree or grade of injury is assigned 
after the tissue has thawed and any advanced imaging is performed 
(
Table	90.2
).
First- degree
 frostbite is marked by numbness and local erythema 
with a pale raised plaque in the area of injury. Only mild tissue slough
-
ing occurs, and there is no infarction. 
Second- degree
 injury presents 
with clear, fluid- filled blisters and surrounding erythema (
Fig. 90.4
). 
Local edema may be present. First-  and second- degree frostbite injury 
results in minimal tissue loss and is considered superficial in the field. 
Third- degree
 frostbite extends into the dermis and dermal vascular 
plexus. The resulting blisters are hemorrhagic. 
Fourth- degree
 injury 
involves the dermis and underlying tissues, extending into muscle and 
bone (
Fig. 90.5
). Third-  and fourth- degree frostbite has anticipated tis
-
sue loss and is field classified as deep.
 
Treatment of Frostbite
Prevention is preferred for any environmental injury, but rapid rec
-
ognition and treatment will mitigate the long- term impact. Once 
frostbite is suspected, the patient should be assessed for concomi
-
tant hypothermia. The injury must be protected from the cold and 
prevented from refreezing if spontaneous thawing has begun. Any 
constricting items, such as jewelry, are removed. Thawing should be 
initiated with a circulating water bath at 37–39°C (98.6–102.2°F). 
Pain medication should be administered. There are numerous com
-
bined therapies for frostbite, including anticoagulants, thrombolyt
-
ics, and vasodilators (
Fig. 90.6
). The indications for each therapy 
depend on the extent of injury, length of time since tissue thaw, local 
availability, and individual national regulatory decisions. It is recom
-
mended that the clinician be aware of their local resources and proto
-
cols. Regardless, treatment with these agents must be initiated within 
12- 72 hours of tissue thaw.
 
NONFREEZING COLD INJURY
Nonfreezing cold injuries include but are not limited to frostnip, chil
-
blains (pernio), cold- immersion foot, and cold- induced fat necrosis.
Frostnip
 is associated with vasoconstriction of skin exposed to the 
cold with ice crystals, or frost, forming on the skin surface. The tissue 
may be numb, and local pallor is present. There is no cellular dam
-
age, and the condition resolves rapidly upon warming. Frostnip does 
indicate that conditions are appropriate for frostbite, and preventative 
measures should be taken.
Chilblains
, also called 
pernio
, is an idiopathic condition suspected 
to	be	a	vasculopathy.	Typically	occurring	in	cold,	damp	conditions,	
vasculitic- appearing lesions develop on the fingers and toes, ears, and 
exposed areas of the legs after environmental exposure (
Fig. 90.7
). It is 
suspected that vasoconstriction and inflammatory reaction are respon
-
sible for the lesions. Recognition and prevention of further cold expo
-
sure is key to treatment. The lesions are self- limiting, and symptoms 
may be addressed with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 
and topical soothing creams. Continued exposure to cold can cause 
persistent lesions. Lesions similar to chilblains have been noted in chil
-
dren with COVID- 19 infection. 
Familial chilblain lupus
, an autoso
-
mal dominant variant of lupus, is caused by variants in the 
TREX1
 and 
SAMHD1
 genes (see 
Chapter 90.1
). Patients develop cold- induced ery
-
thematous peripheral skin lesions and manifest systemic disease typi
-
cal of lupus. In addition, fever and arthralgias may be present.
Immersion foot
 or 
trench foot
 occurs with continuous immersion 
in warm or cold water. The injury occurs more rapidly in cold water. 
Continuous exposure to the wet environment, whether through actual 
immersion in water or saturated footwear, causes hyperemia, edema, 
and ultimately blister formation with skin sloughing. The condition 
can progress to ischemia and gangrene. Awareness of wet footwear and 
subsequent changing, or drying, of shoes and socks is the method of 
prevention. Vapor barrier socks or boots do not prevent sweat from 
accumulating and creating a wet environment. Like other cold injuries, 
treatment consists of thoroughly drying and warming the tissue. Anti
-
biotics are not necessary unless signs of infection are present.
Cold- induced fat necrosis
 is secondary to local cold injury to 
the superficial adipose tissue. It presents with raised, erythematous 
nodules or plaques, evolving over 12- 72 hours after exposure to cold. 
Distribution in children is predominantly on the face, specifically 
the cheeks and forehead. Obese children and adolescents may have 
lesions on areas poorly protected from the cold, including the but
-
tocks, thighs, abdominal pannus, and under the chin. Lesions are 
self-	limiting	and	typically	resolve	in	10-	20	days.	Treatment	consists	
of rewarming, avoidance of the cold, and NSAIDs as necessary for 
discomfort.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
90.1
  Cold- Induced Autoinflammatory and 
Other Genetic Disorders
James J. Nocton and James W. Verbsky
A number of 
autoinflammatory
 and other genetic disorders have 
been identified that are characterized by an 
exacerbation of symptoms 
upon exposure to cold temperatures
. These disorders differ from 
cold 
injury
, 
cold urticaria
, and problems related primarily to vasoconstric
-
tion because they typically manifest very early in life and are associ
-
ated with a wider spectrum of signs and symptoms, reflecting either 
underlying systemic inflammation or the protean effects of specific 
genetic variants. A relatively lower ambient temperature or rapid cool
-
ing and evaporation from the skin are often sufficient to produce the 
signs and symptoms of these disorders; therefore the relationship to 
cold temperature is not always obvious. The genetic variants associated 
with most of these disorders impact cellular signaling pathways that 
lead to the expression of proinflammatory cytokines in the absence of 
an extrinsic trigger; therefore most of these diseases are classified as 
autoinflammatory.
These conditions should be suspected primarily in infants or very 
young children who develop persistent, recurrent, or periodic fevers 
associated with rashes or arthralgias that cannot be explained by an 
infectious disease or another chronic inflammatory or rheumatic dis
-
ease. Signs and symptoms associated with these diseases may begin as 
early as the first week of life. The very early onset distinguishes these 
genetic diseases from acquired conditions such as Raynaud phenom
-
enon, pernio, cryoglobulinemia, cold urticaria, and other cold- induced 
problems potentially related to acquired autoimmunity. The rashes are 
most often evanescent and appear similar to urticaria; however, they 
are usually not pruritic and are histologically different from urticaria. 
Laboratory evidence of chronic inflammation is often present, includ
-
ing elevations of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C- reactive 
protein. The association with cold exposure may be subtle and not ini
-
tially apparent.
The diagnostic algorithm for these disorders should begin with a 
thorough history and a careful examination, paying particular attention 
to potential additional signs of conjunctivitis, a frequent accompany
-
ing feature, decreased limb movement that might indicate arthralgia or 
arthritis, the morphology of any cutaneous lesions, and the association 
of symptoms and signs with cooling or colder temperatures. Unlike 
cold urticaria, the hivelike lesions often associated with these disorders 
cannot be precipitated by a cold stimulation test using the application 
of an ice cube to the skin. Measurement of serum inflammatory mark
-
ers may help distinguish autoinflammatory disease from more benign 
conditions; infectious diseases may need to be excluded with appro
-
priate testing. A skin biopsy may provide information that will help 
narrow the differential diagnosis by identifying either a neutrophilic 
dermatosis, granulomatous inflammation, or vasculitis characteristic 
of one of these diseases. Ultimately, focused genetic sequencing can 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 90
 u 
Cold Injuries 
663
be performed, searching for specific genetic variants that will confirm 
a diagnosis.
Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS)
, along with 
neonatal- onset multisystem inflammatory disorder (NOMID) and 
Muckle- Wells syndrome (MWS), constitute the 
cryopyrin
- 
associated 
periodic syndromes (CAPS)
 (see 
Chapter 204
). These diseases are all 
the result of pathogenic variants in 
NLRP3
 which encodes the protein 
cryopyrin
, a component of the inflammasome complex, which is criti
-
cal in the production of the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin 
(IL)- 1β and IL- 18. Although each of these diseases may be exacerbated 
by cold exposure or cooling, the association with cold is most consis
-
tent in those with 
FCAS
. 
FCAS
 should be considered in infants who 
develop episodes of a hivelike rash, often beginning in the neonatal 
period, accompanied by fever, conjunctivitis, joint pain, neutrophilia, 
thrombocytosis, and elevated inflammatory markers, and triggered by 
exposure to cold or low ambient temperatures. The rash is typically 
not pruritic and histologically consists of a neutrophilic perivascular 
and perieccrine inflammatory infiltrate. Episodes are short and gener
-
ally last less than 24 hours. 
MWS
 is more severe than FCAS, causing 
more frequent hivelike rashes and fevers, along with arthralgias, con
-
junctivitis, and aseptic meningitis, and with potential eventual progres
-
sion to hearing loss. Like FCAS, the onset of symptoms is most often 
in infancy, and the histology of skin lesions in these two disorders is 
similar. 
NOMID
 is the most severe form of CAPS and is associated 
with a nonpruritic urticarial rash often present at birth and more pro
-
found neurologic and bone disease. CAPS are inherited in an auto
-
somal dominant manner, and the diagnosis is made based on clinical 
features and the identification of a variant in the NLRP3 gene. Variants 
in 
NLRP12
 and in 
NLRC4
 have also been associated with similar clini
-
cal syndromes sometimes referred to as 
FCAS2
 and 
FCAS4
, respec
-
tively.	Treatment	with	the	IL-	1	inhibitors	anakinra	and	canakinumab	
has been effective in most individuals with CAPS.
PLCG2- associated antibody deficiency and immune dysreg
-
ulation (PLAID)
 (sometimes referred to as 
FCAS3
) is an auto
-
somal dominant disease resulting from a pathogenic variant of 
PLCG2
, which encodes a transmembrane enzyme expressed pri
-
marily in myeloid and lymphoid cells that regulates inflamma
-
some activity and proinflammatory cytokine production. PLAID 
causes pruritic urticaria from birth induced by ambient cold tem
-
peratures or cooling and lasting for minutes to hours. In some 
individuals, acral blistering lesions resembling a burn may also be 
present during infancy on the ears, nose, and fingers. Histology of 
urticarial lesions reveals increased mast cells. Because PLCG2 is 
expressed in mast cells and affects mast cell degranulation, these 
subjects can have more classic hives as compared with other FCAS 
syndromes. Other lesions reveal noncaseating granulomas. Older 
individuals may develop syncope induced by cold exposure and 
a burning sensation in the throat when eating cold foods. Hypo
-
gammaglobulinemia may lead to frequent sinopulmonary and 
other	infections.	The	diagnosis	is	made	based	on	clinical	features	
and	the	identification	of	variants	in	the	PLCG2	gene.	Treatment	
of PLAID includes avoiding evaporative cooling and minimiz
-
ing cold exposure, antihistamines, and for those with evidence 
of immunodeficiency, intravenous immunoglobulin infusions to 
prevent frequent infections.
STING- associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI)
 is 
an autosomal dominant disease resulting from a pathogenic variant in 
TMEM173
, which encodes 
stimulator of interferon genes (STING)
, 
an activator of interferon gene transcription (see 
Chapter 205
). Signs 
and symptoms usually appear in infancy but may also appear later and 
include fever and a variety of cutaneous lesions. Violaceous nodules 
and plaques on the cheeks, ears, and nose and telangiectasias, pustules, 
or blisters, often most noticeable on the extremities, may occur. The 
skin lesions are exacerbated by cold temperatures, and some develop 
ulcerative or gangrenous lesions. In time, interstitial lung disease pro
-
gressing to fibrosis has been described. Histology reveals vasculitis of 
medium and small vessels. The diagnosis is made based on clinical 
features	and	the	identification	of	the	variant	in	the	TMEM173	gene.	
Responses to treatment with corticosteroids and immunomodulators, 
including cyclophosphamide and mycophenolate mofetil, have been 
variable and inconsistent. Janus kinase inhibitors, which inhibit inter
-
feron receptor signaling, have shown promise in treatment of these 
disorders.
Familial chilblain lupus
 is a rare condition triggered by cold expo
-
sure that presents with painful, bluish- red, papular or nodular lesions 
of the skin in acral locations. Ulceration can occur, but deep ulceration 
and necrosis are infrequent, and the lesions tend to heal without scar
-
ring. This is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by heterozygous 
variants in 
TREX1
 or 
SAMHD1
, the same genes containing variants 
associated with Aicardi- Goutières syndrome (AGS). AGS is a syn
-
drome characterized by developmental delay, abnormal neurologic 
signs, microcephaly with brain calcifications, and CNS pleocytosis, as 
well as skin lesions resembling chilblains. Both 
TREX1
 and 
SAMHD1
 
are involved in DNA degradation, and their deficiencies result in intra
-
cellular nucleic acid that stimulates interferon production. AGS and 
familial chilblain lupus can be considered a spectrum of severity of the 
same genetic defect.
Factor XII–associated cold autoinflammatory syndrome
 is an 
autosomal dominant disease resulting from a pathogenic variant in 
F12
 encoding the coagulation factor XII. The variant leads to spon
-
taneous activation of factor XII, which in turn increases bradykinin 
and IL- 1 levels. Individuals with this mutation develop an urticarial- 
like rash that begins in the first few weeks of life precipitated by cold. 
The rash is nonpruritic and evanescent, and as individuals age it is 
accompanied by more severe systemic symptoms of chills, headaches, 
arthralgias, and fatigue. Serum inflammatory markers are elevated, 
and skin histology reveals perivascular macrophage and neutrophilic 
infiltrates. The diagnosis is made by identifying a variant in 
F12
. 
Treatment	with	the	IL-	1	receptor	antagonist	anakinra	or	the	brady
-
kinin B2 receptor antagonist icatibant has shown promise in a small 
number of individuals.
Crisponi syndrome/cold- induced sweating syndrome (CS/CISS)
 
is an autosomal recessive disease resulting from variants in 
CRLF1
 or 
CLCF1
. These genes encode proteins involved in neurologic develop
-
ment, including facial motor neurons and the sympathetic nervous sys
-
tem; therefore this syndrome is not classified as an autoinflammatory 
syndrome. Symptoms and signs are typically apparent in the neona
-
tal period and include fever, camptodactyly, and involuntary episodic 
contractions of facial and pharyngeal muscles resulting in breathing 
and feeding difficulties. There is high neonatal mortality, and those that 
survive develop cold- induced profuse sweating in childhood. Scoliosis 
and other dysmorphic features (depressed nasal bridge, high arched 
palate) are also common. The diagnosis is made by identifying a vari
-
ant most commonly in 
CRLF1
.	Treatment	of	the	neonatal	symptoms	
is supportive. The cold- induced sweating is managed with clonidine, 
amitriptyline, or moxonidine.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

664 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
The continuum of anesthesia includes varying degrees of sedation (i.e., 
mild, moderate, or deep) and general anesthesia. All forms of 
sedation
 
are characterized by some preservation of purposeful movement (see 
Chapter 92
), whereas 
general anesthesia
 is defined by the complete 
loss of consciousness. Potent pharmacologic agents are required to sup
-
press the perception and physiologic response to noxious stimuli. Peri
-
operatively, the anesthesiologist is responsible for providing hypnosis 
and analgesia while preserving physiologic homeostasis (
Table	91.1
). 
This begins with the performance of a comprehensive preanesthesia 
history (
Table	91.2
). Although anesthetic risk has greatly decreased 
with advancements in pharmacology and monitoring technology, the 
persistent risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality demands vigi
-
lance. The risk is elevated in certain disease states (
Table	91.3
).
PREANESTHETIC EVALUATION
All children presenting for surgery should undergo a preanesthetic his
-
tory and multiorgan system assessment with assignment of 
American 
Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status (ASA- PS)
 (
Table	91.4
). 
Children of ASA- PS I- II generally require a brief focused history and 
physical examination with no additional testing. Patients with a com
-
plex medical history of ASA- PS 
≥
III require a more comprehensive 
preanesthetic assessment, often with ancillary preoperative testing. 
Every patient should be screened for anesthetic risks, including drug 
allergies, previous reactions to anesthetics, and family history of prob
-
lems with anesthesia (e.g., sudden perioperative death, hyperthermia 
after surgery), which may indicate risk of malignant hyperthermia.
Respiratory System
Recent respiratory tract infections should be noted. 
Clear rhinorrhea 
without fever or evidence of lower respiratory disease is not associated 
with increased anesthetic risk.
 Respiratory illnesses associated with 
fever, mucopurulent nasal discharge, productive cough, or lower 
respiratory symptoms (wheezing, rales) are associated with increased 
airway reactivity and anesthetic complications (laryngospasm, bron
-
chospasm, reduced mucociliary clearance, atelectasis, and hypoxemia) 
for up to 6 weeks thereafter. Thus elective procedures requiring general 
anesthesia should be postponed 4- 6 weeks in this setting.
Children with reactive airway disease require a thorough preanesthetic 
assessment. Acute, potentially fatal bronchospasm can occur during 
induction of anesthesia and endotracheal intubation for routine, minor 
surgery in children with asthma. Risk factors for anesthetic complications 
include previous asthma exacerbations requiring (1) hospital admission 
within the previous year, (2) emergency department (ED) care within the 
last 6 months, (3) previous intensive care unit (ICU) admission, or (4) pre
-
vious parenteral systemic corticosteroids. Ideally, children should be free 
of wheezing for least several days before surgery, even if this necessitates 
increased controller medication administration (
β
- adrenergic agonist 
and corticosteroids). Active wheezing may be an indication to delay elec
-
tive surgery. Chronic respiratory conditions such as bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia and cystic fibrosis are also associated with significant intraop
-
erative risks. Every effort should be made to ensure that children with 
such disorders achieve optimal respiratory status before surgery.
 
Airway Evaluation
Induction of general anesthesia is associated with reduced spontaneous 
ventilation and airway reflexes. Prediction of difficult bag- mask ventila
-
tion and/or intubation before anesthesia is critical. Congenital anomalies 
associated with airway compromise include micrognathia, macroglos
-
sia, and thoracic anomalies (
Table	91.5
). Conditions that impair mouth 
opening (e.g., temporomandibular joint disease) should be noted. A his
-
tory of wheezing or stridor may indicate postoperative airway complica
-
tions and difficult intraoperative airway management. It is imperative to 
ask about a history of sleep- disordered breathing, including obstructive 
and central sleep apnea, as this may lead to increased risk of perianes
-
thetic respiratory complications in children
. Polysomnography is the 
gold standard for diagnosis and grading of sleep disordered breathing. 
The 
STBUR
 (snoring, trouble breathing, unrefreshed) questionnaire is 
used to identify patients with sleep- disordered breathing who may be at 
risk for perioperative respiratory complications. Postoperative admis
-
sion for monitoring may be indicated for patients with moderate and 
severe forms of sleep- disordered breathing.
 
Cardiovascular System
Most anesthetic agents possess myocardial depressant properties. All 
patients should be screened for the presence of heart disease. Impor
-
tant cardiovascular considerations include history of congenital heart 
disease (CHD), cyanosis, arrhythmias, or cardiomyopathy. Room- air 
pulse oximetry should be performed as part of the preanesthetic evalu
-
ation. Accurate diagnosis of cardiac murmurs in neonates is essential. 
A history of cardiac dysrhythmias should be investigated because inha
-
lational anesthetics may be arrhythmogenic. A pediatric cardiologist 
should evaluate children with known CHD undergoing surgery. Pre
-
operative ancillary studies may include chest x- ray, electrocardiogram 
(ECG), echocardiogram, or cardiac catheterization. Lesions associated 
with increased anesthetic risk include single- ventricle heart disease, 
fixed obstructive outflow tract lesions (aortic valve and pulmonary 
valve stenosis), and cardiomyopathy. Children with these conditions 
should be cared for by a 
cardiac anesthesia service
. Antibiotic pro
-
phylaxis for the prevention of bacterial endocarditis should be admin
-
istered when appropriate in accordance with the American Heart 
Association (AHA) guidelines.
 
Hematologic System
Evidence of coagulopathy should be sought. Easy bruising, familial 
bleeding disorders, and anticoagulant (e.g., aspirin, heparin, direct oral 
anticoagulant [DOAC], warfarin) use should be discussed. Preoperative 
adequacy of hemostatic function (e.g., platelet count, fibrinogen, pro
-
thrombin time, partial thromboplastin time) and correction of coagu
-
lopathic disorders may be indicated for complex procedures associated 
with significant risk of perioperative hemorrhage. In neonates, assur
-
ance of vitamin K prophylaxis and adequate coagulation status is criti
-
cal before any major surgery. Although anemia may be well tolerated 
in healthy children, anesthesia and surgery increase oxygen consump
-
tion. Preoperative anemia should be corrected when oxygen delivery 
is limited or blood loss is expected. In the patient with life- threatening 
hemorrhage (trauma), massive transfusion protocols of 1:1:1 replace
-
ment of packed red blood cells:fresh- frozen plasma:platelets should be 
used. Initiation of early antifibrinolytic therapy in the setting of life- 
threatening hemorrhage has been linked to reduced early morality.
 
Neurologic System
A history of neurologic and neuromuscular disorders should be 
sought. Preoperative developmental assessments may be helpful in 
interpreting age- dependent variation in the response to pain. Mainte
-
nance of appropriate perioperative anticonvulsant therapy is essential 
Chapter 
91
Anesthesia and 
 Perioperative Care
John P. Scott
Table 91.1 
 
  Goals of Anesthesia
Analgesia
Amnesia
Hypnosis
Akinesia
Maintenance of physiologic homeostasis
Vigilance
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91
 u 
Anesthesia and  Perioperative Care 
665
in children with seizure disorders because the seizure threshold may 
be lowered perioperatively. Children with obstructive hydrocephalus 
typically require ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt insertion to divert 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and to prevent intracranial hypertension 
(ICH). Repeated shunt malfunction is common, and these children 
may present for shunt revision with signs of ICH (vomiting, altered 
mentation, sundowning). Similarly, shunt patency and function should 
be ensured preoperatively in children with VP shunts presenting for 
non- neurosurgical procedures.
 
Psychologic Assessment
Surgery and painful medical procedures are psychologically traumatic 
events for children and families. Children who require anesthesia 
may experience fear and anxiety. They may also sense stressful sig
-
nals from parents and caregivers. Children undergoing surgery may 
exhibit negative behavioral changes postoperatively. These maladap
-
tive behavioral responses may include enuresis, separation anxiety, 
temper tantrums, and nighttime crying, as well as fear of strangers, 
medical providers, and hospitals. Sleep quality may be altered post
-
operatively, resulting in further behavioral compromise. Preoperative 
psychologic preparation programs have been developed to reduce 
the incidence of perioperative behavioral changes. 
Parental presence 
during induction (PPI)
 has not been shown to improve postopera
-
tive behavior. Oral preoperative midazolam (0.5 mg/kg
) produces 
rapid- onset anxiolysis and amnesia and may decrease negative behav
-
ioral changes.
 
Genetic Evaluation
Children with genetic conditions may have syndrome- specific anes
-
thetic considerations. For example, children with trisomy 21 may 
have cardiac anomalies, macroglossia, upper airway obstruction, 
and hypothyroidism (see 
Chapter 99.2
). Atlantoaxial instability, 
common in trisomy 21, has been linked to cervical dislocation and 
spinal cord trauma with neck extension during intubation. Some 
anesthesiologists recommend extension and flexion lateral neck 
films to detect instability before surgery. For children with other 
known genetic disorders, it is essential to review specific anesthetic 
considerations.
 
PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION
Preoperative Fasting
Preoperative fasting guidelines have been developed to reduce the inci
-
dence of aspiration of gastric contents during anesthesia. Aspiration 
may lead to laryngospasm, bronchospasm, and postoperative pneumo
-
nitis. Aspiration of gastric contents may be a potentially lethal com
-
plication in children with chronic lung disease or critical illness. 
Table	
91.6
 lists preoperative fasting guidelines (e.g., nothing by mouth, or nil 
per os [NPO] status). Clear, sweet liquids (e.g., Pedialyte, 5% dextrose 
able 91.2 
 
  The Preanesthetic History
Child’s Previous Anesthetic and Surgical Procedures
	•		Review	previous	anesthetic	records:
Ease of mask ventilation
Grade of laryngoscopy; type and size of laryngoscope; 
 
endotracheal tube size
Issues during emergence (awakening) from anesthesia 
 
(postoperative vomiting, emergence delirium)
History of hyperthermia or acidosis in the child or family members
Perinatal Problems (Especially for Infants)
	•		Prematurity
	•		Need	for	supplemental	oxygen	or	intubation	and	ventilation
	•		History	of	apnea	and	bradycardia
	•		History	of	cardiovascular	compromise
	•		Other	major	illnesses	and	hospitalizations
	•		Family	history	of	anesthetic	complications,	malignant	
 
hyperthermia, or pseudocholinesterase deficiency
Respiratory Problems
	•		Long-	term	exposure	to	environmental	tobacco	smoke
	•		Obstructive	breathing	score
	•		STBUR	(snoring,	trouble	breathing,	unrefreshed)
	•		Cyanosis	(especially	in	infants	<6	mo	of	age)
	•		Recurrent	respiratory	infections
	•		Recent	lower	respiratory	tract	infection
	•		Previous	laryngotracheitis	(croup)	or	laryngomalacia
	•		Reactive	airway	disease
	•		Airway	abnormalities,	facial	anomalies,	mucopolysaccharidosis
Cardiac Problems
	•		Murmur	or	history	of	congenital	heart	disease
	•		Dysrhythmia
	•		Exercise	intolerance
	•		Syncope
	•		Cyanosis
Gastrointestinal Problems
	•		Reflux	and	vomiting
	•		Feeding	difficulties
	•		Failure	to	thrive
	•		Liver	disease
	•		Exposure	to	infectious	pathogens
Neuromuscular Problems
	•		Neuromuscular	diseases
	•		Developmental	delay
	•		Myopathy
	•		Seizure	disorder
Hematologic Problems
	•		Anemia
	•		Bleeding	diathesis
	•		Tumor
	•		Immunocompromise
	•		Prior	blood	transfusions	and	reactions
Renal Problems
	•		Renal	insufficiency,	oliguria,	anuria
	•		Fluid	and	electrolyte	abnormalities
Psychosocial Considerations
	•		Drug	abuse,	use	of	cigarettes	or	alcohol
	•		Physical	or	sexual	abuse
	•		Family	dysfunction
	•		Previous	traumatic	medical	or	surgical	experience
	•		Psychosis,	anxiety,	depression
Gynecologic Considerations
	•		Sexual	history	(sexually	transmitted	infections)
	•		Possibility	of	pregnancy
Current Medications
	•		Prior	administration	of	corticosteroids
Allergies
	•		Drugs
	•		Iodine
	•		Latex	products
	•		Surgical	tape
	•		Food	(especially	soy	and	egg	albumin)
Other
	•		Dental	condition	(loose	or	cracked	teeth)
	•		When	and	what	the	child	last	ate	(especially	in	emergency	
 
procedures)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

666 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
in water [D5W]) facilitate gastric emptying, prevent hypoglycemia, 
and may be given up to 2 hours before anesthesia. Breast milk may be 
given to infants up to 4 hours before surgery. Solids should be avoided 
for 6- 8 hours before surgery. Conditions associated with delayed gas
-
tric emptying may require prolonged periods of fasting. The optimal 
duration of preoperative fasting in otherwise well patients without risk 
factors for delayed gastric emptying remains a source of controversy. 
Many efforts have sought to shorten NPO duration for clear liquids 
from 2 hours to 1 hour in order to preserve fluid and glycemic balance 
in children presenting for surgery.
Table 91.3 
 
  Specific Pediatric Diseases and Their Anesthetic Implications
DISEASE
IMPLICATIONS
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Asthma
Intraoperative bronchospasm that may be life 
threatening
Pneumothorax or atelectasis
Optimal preoperative medical management is 
essential
Difficult airway
Special equipment and personnel may be 
required
Should be anticipated with dysmorphic 
 
features or storage diseases
Patients with trisomy 21 may require 
 
atlantooccipital joint evaluation
Increased risk with acute airway obstruction, 
epiglottitis, laryngotracheobronchitis, or 
airway foreign body
Bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia
Barotrauma with positive pressure ventilation
Oxygen toxicity, pneumothorax a risk
Cystic fibrosis
Airway reactivity, bronchorrhea, increased 
 
intraoperative pulmonary shunt and hypoxia
Risk of pneumothorax, pulmonary hemorrhage
Atelectasis, risk of prolonged postoperative 
ventilation
Patient should be assessed for cor pulmonale
Sleep apnea
Pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale 
must be excluded
Careful postoperative observation for 
 
obstruction required
CARDIAC
Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis as indicated
Use of air filters; careful purging of air from the 
intravenous equipment
Physician must understand the effects of 
 
various anesthetics on the hemodynamics 
 
of specific lesions
Possible need for preoperative evaluation of 
myocardial function and pulmonary vascular 
resistance
Provide information about pacemaker function 
and ventricular device function
HEMATOLOGIC
Sickle cell disease
Possible need for simple or exchange 
 
transfusion based on preoperative 
 
hemoglobin concentration and percentage 
of hemoglobin S
Avoid hypoxemia, hypothermia, dehydration, 
and hyperviscosity states
Oncology
Pulmonary evaluation of patients who have 
received bleomycin, 
bis
- chloroethyl- nitrosourea, 
chloroethyl- cyclohexyl- nitrosourea, 
 
methotrexate, or radiation to the chest
Avoidance of high oxygen concentration
Cardiac evaluation of patients who have 
 
received anthracyclines; risk of severe 
 
myocardial depression with volatile agents
Potential for coagulopathy
RHEUMATOLOGIC
Limited mobility of the temporomandibular 
joint, cervical spine, arytenoid cartilages
Careful preoperative evaluation required
Possible difficult airway
DISEASE
IMPLICATIONS
GASTROINTESTINAL
Esophageal, 
gastric
Potential for reflux and aspiration
Liver
Altered metabolism of many anesthetic drugs
Potential for coagulopathy and uncontrollable 
intraoperative bleeding
RENAL
Altered electrolyte and acid- base status
Altered clearance of many anesthetic drugs
Need for preoperative dialysis in selected cases
Succinylcholine to be used with extreme 
caution and only when the serum potassium 
level has recently been shown to be normal
NEUROLOGIC
Seizure disorder
Avoidance of anesthetics that may lower the 
seizure threshold
Optimal control ascertained preoperatively
Preoperative serum anticonvulsant 
 
measurements
Increased 
intracranial 
pressure
Avoidance of agents that increase cerebral 
blood flow
Maintain cerebral perfusion pressure.
Neuromuscular 
disease
Avoidance of depolarizing relaxants; at risk for 
hyperkalemia
Patient may be at risk for malignant hyperthermia; 
avoid volatile anesthetics in myopathies
Developmental 
delay
Patient may be uncooperative during induction 
and emergence
Psychiatric
Monoamine oxidase inhibitor (or cocaine) 
 
may interact with meperidine, resulting in 
 
hyperthermia and seizures
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may 
induce or inhibit various hepatic enzymes that 
may alter anesthetic drug clearance
Illicit drugs may have adverse effects on 
 
cardiorespiratory homeostasis and may 
 
potentiate the action of anesthetics
ENDOCRINE
Diabetes
Greatest risk is unrecognized intraoperative 
hypoglycemia; intraoperative blood glucose 
level monitoring needed especially when 
insulin is administered
SKIN
Burns
Difficult airway
Fluid shifts
Bleeding
Risk of rhabdomyolysis and hyperkalemia from 
succinylcholine after burns for many months
IMMUNOLOGIC
Retroviral drugs may inhibit benzodiazepine 
clearance
Immunodeficiency requires careful infection 
control practices
Cytomegalovirus- negative blood products, 
 
irradiation, or leukofiltration may be required
METABOLIC
Careful assessment of glucose homeostasis in 
infants
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91
 u 
Anesthesia and  Perioperative Care 
667
The Full Stomach
Gastric emptying may be delayed for up to 96 hours after an acute epi
-
sode	of	trauma	or	surgical	illness.	To	mitigate	risk	of	aspiration,	it	is	
desirable to secure the airway as rapidly as possible during induction of 
anesthesia in patients at risk for having a full stomach. Under these cir
-
cumstances, rapid sequence induction of anesthesia is indicated (
rapid 
sequence induction
; see 
Chapter 86
).
 
Parental Presence During Induction of Anesthesia
Parents or guardians may expect to be with their child during the 
induction of anesthesia. Removing a fearful child from a parent is 
stressful for the child and caregivers. Premedication with an oral 
benzodiazepine (e.g., midazolam) frequently provides calm, smooth 
parental separation conditions. When parental separation cannot be 
achieved comfortably with premedication and behavioral modification 
(patient education and desensitization to the operative environment), 
PPI may be indicated. Although PPI in the hands of a confident, com
-
petent anesthesia practitioner may replace the need for preoperative 
medication, it does not reliably predict smooth induction. PPI has not 
been shown to decrease emergence delirium or postoperative behav
-
ioral changes, and it does not appear to be superior to premedication 
with oral midazolam.
 
GENERAL ANESTHESIA
Analgesia
Pediatric anesthesiologists are responsible for providing analgesia to 
children for procedures within operating room (OR) and non- OR set
-
tings (
Table	91.7
). Multimodal techniques exist to provide pain relief 
during operative procedures for children of all ages, including critically 
ill infants. Effective analgesia is essential to blunt physiologic responses 
to painful stimuli (surgery) and modulate the deleterious physiologic 
and metabolic consequences. The response to painful and stressful 
stimuli may provoke 
systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
(SIRS)
, which has been linked to increased catabolism, physiologic 
instability, and mortality (see 
Chapter 85
).
 
Hypnosis and Amnesia
The attenuation of both consciousness 
(hypnosis)
 and conscious 
recall 
(amnesia)
 is critical during pediatric anesthesia care. Aware
-
ness during procedures may be as physically and psychologically 
deleterious as the experience of pain. A primary goal of anesthetic 
management is to minimize fear and anxiety during both painful and 
nonpainful procedures. Many drugs provide anxiolysis and amnesia 
for such events (
Table	91.8
). However, it is important to remember that 
sedative- hypnotic agents may alter consciousness without producing 
analgesia; 
analgesia
 and 
hypnosis
 are not synonymous. It is also pos
-
sible to provide analgesia (local, spinal, or epidural) without altering 
consciousness.
Sedation
 describes a medically induced state in the continuum 
between wakefulness and general anesthesia in which patients maintain 
the ability to respond purposefully to varying degrees of stimulation 
(see 
Table	91.7
). 
Light (minimal) sedation
 is defined as anxiolysis with 
minimally reduced reflexes or airway patency with normal response 
to verbal commands. In 
moderate sedation,
 the patient continues to 
respond purposefully to verbal commands, either alone or with light 
touch. 
Deep sedation
 is defined by preservation of purposeful move
-
ment with repeated or painful stimulation. 
General anesthesia
 is 
characterized by unconsciousness, amnesia, and reduced physiologic 
reflexes, including cardiorespiratory reflexes (
airway- protective
 and 
vasomotor reflexes
). It is common to transition between states of seda
-
tion and general anesthesia with loss of consciousness, airway patency, 
and airway- protective reflexes; in this scenario, loss of cardiovascular 
stability may occur. Individuals providing sedation and anesthesia for 
children must be able to identify the anesthetic state of the patient and 
support cardiorespiratory insufficiency.
 
Akinesia (Immobility or Muscular Relaxation)
Akinesia,
 the absence of movement, is commonly indicated to ensure 
safe and adequate operative conditions. Neuromuscular blocking 
agents (NMBAs) may be used to produce akinesia (see 
Table	91.8
). 
However, the absence of movement is not indicative of hypnosis, 
amnesia, or analgesia. Whenever NMBAs are used, 
sedation and anal
-
gesia must be provided.
 
Monitoring
Administration of anesthesia increases the need to monitor and sup
-
port physiologic integrity and homeostasis because of potentially 
life- threatening physiologic consequences (see 
Tables	91.7	and	91.8
). 
Consequently, the ASA mandates routine monitoring of oxygenation, 
ventilation, and circulation during the provision of anesthesia. This 
includes assessment of continuous pulse oximetry, capnography, elec
-
trocardiography, intermittent blood pressure measurements (every 5 
minutes), and temperature when temperature instability is anticipated. 
The use of advanced invasive (arterial and central venous pressure) or 
noninvasive (near- infrared spectroscopy) monitoring varies based on 
procedural complexity and ASA- PS.
 
  
 
  American Society of Anesthesiology Physical 
Status Classification
Class 1: Healthy patient, no systemic disease
Class 2: Mild systemic disease with no functional limitations (mild 
chronic renal failure, iron- deficiency anemia, mild asthma)
Class 3: Severe systemic disease with functional limitations 
(hypertension, poorly controlled asthma or diabetes, congenital 
heart disease, cystic fibrosis)
Class 4: Severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life 
(critically and/or acutely ill patients with major systemic disease)
Class 5: Moribund patients not expected to survive 24 hr, with or 
without surgery
Additional classification: “E”—emergency surgery
Copyright American Society of Anesthesiology, 
http://www.asahq.org
.
Table 91.5 
 
  Common Difficult Airway Syndromes
Achondroplasia
Airway tumors, hemangiomas
Apert syndrome
Beckwith- Wiedemann syndrome
Choanal atresia
Cornelia de Lange syndrome
Cystic hygroma/teratoma
DiGeorge syndrome
Fractured mandible
Goldenhar syndrome
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Pierre Robin syndrome
Smith- Lemli- Opitz syndrome
Treacher- Collins syndrome
Trisomy 21
Turner syndrome
Table 91.6 
 
  Guidelines for Preoperative Fasting 
 
(“2- 4- 6- 8 Rule”)
*
TIME BEFORE SURGERY (
hr
)
ORAL INTAKE
2
Clear, sweet liquids
4
Breast milk
6
Infant formula, fruit juices, gelatin
8
Solid food
*These are general guidelines and may differ among hospitals.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

668 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Specific Medications
Inhalational Anesthetics
Inhalational anesthetics are frequently used for the induction and 
maintenance of general anesthesia in children. Pediatric inhalational 
anesthetics include sevoflurane, isoflurane, and desflurane. Although 
halothane is the prototypical pediatric inhalational anesthetic and may 
be used in other parts of the world, it has been replaced by sevoflurane 
and is no longer used in the United States and Europe.
The 
minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)
 of an inhalational 
anesthetic is the alveolar concentration (expressed as percent at 1 
atmosphere) that provides sufficient depth of anesthesia for surgery 
in 50% of patients. For potent inhalational agents, the alveolar con
-
centration of an anesthetic reflects the arterial concentration of anes
-
thetic in the blood perfusing the brain. MAC is a measure of anesthetic 
potency analogous to the 
ED
50
 (effective dose in 50% of recipients) of a 
drug. MAC is age dependent; it is lower in premature than in full- term 
infants and decreases from term through infancy to preadolescence. In 
adolescence, MAC again increases, falling thereafter.
Respiratory Effects
. 
The advantages of inhalational anesthesia are 
rapid onset and offset with the convenient route of delivery and respi
-
ratory excretion. These agents provide profound analgesia and amne
-
sia. Inhalational volatile anesthetic agents are poorly soluble in blood 
but rapidly equilibrate between alveolar gas and blood. They may irri
-
tate the airway and provoke laryngospasm. All inhalational anesthetics 
depress ventilation in a dose- dependent manner. Thus expired carbon 
dioxide (CO
2
) and Pa
co
2
 (arterial partial pressure of CO
2
) will increase 
in spontaneously breathing children. Volatile anesthetics shift the 
CO
2
 response curve to the right, thus decreasing the normal increase 
in minute ventilation with increasing Pa
co
2
. Inhalational anesthesia 
decreases end- expiratory lung volume (functional residual capacity). 
Small lung volumes are associated with reduced lung compliance, 
increased pulmonary vascular resistance, and restrictive lung defects. 
Volatile agents depress normal hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, 
increasing intrapulmonary arteriovenous shunting and hypoxemia.
 
Cardiovascular Effects
. 
All volatile anesthetics reduce cardiac 
output and peripheral vascular resistance; hypotension is common. 
This is accentuated in hypovolemic patients and more pronounced in 
neonates. Inhalational anesthetics also depress baroreceptor and heart 
rate responses. The administration of inhalational anesthesia may result 
in decreased tissue oxygen delivery. Perioperatively, cellular metabo
-
lism increases, creating a potential imbalance between oxygen demand 
and oxygen delivery. Development of intraoperative dysoxia is a sign of 
this imbalance. All volatile inhalational anesthetic agents cause 
cere
-
brovasodilation
 and uncouple cerebral blow flow with cerebral meta
-
bolic rate. Although inhalational anesthetics decrease cerebral oxygen 
consumption, they may disproportionately increase cerebral oxygen 
blood flow. Thus inhalational anesthetics should be used with caution 
in children who have elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) or impaired 
cerebral perfusion (i.e., traumatic brain injury).
 
Sevoflurane
Sevoflurane is the most commonly used inhalational agent for induc
-
tion and maintenance of general anesthesia in children. Sevoflurane 
possesses minimal airway irritant properties and is a useful induction 
agent when co- administered with nitrous oxide. Emergence from sevo
-
flurane anesthesia is rapid; however, there is a significant incidence of 
emergence delirium
, especially with inadequate pain control. This 
effect may be attenuated with adequate analgesia and supplemen
-
tal hypnotic agents (e.g., midazolam, dexmedetomidine, propofol). 
Metabolism of sevoflurane by cytochrome P450 (CYP) yields free 
fluoride, which may be nephrotoxic. Sevoflurane degradation by desic
-
cated CO
2
 absorbents at low fresh gas flows (<2 L/min) may produce 
Table 91.7 
 
  Definitions of Anesthesia Care
MONITORED ANESTHESIA CARE
A designated anesthesia service in which an anesthesiologist has 
been requested to participate in the care of a patient undergoing a 
diagnostic or therapeutic procedure.
Monitored anesthesia care includes all aspects of anesthesia care: a 
preprocedure assessment, intraprocedure care, and postprocedure 
anesthesia management.
During monitored anesthesia care, the anesthesiologist or a member 
of the anesthesia care team provides a number of specific services, 
which may include but are not limited to the following:
	•		Discussing	anesthesia	care	with	the	family	and	child,	obtaining	consent	
for anesthesia, allaying anxiety and answering questions—family- 
centered anesthesia care.
	•		Monitoring	of	vital	signs,	maintenance	of	the	patient’s	airway,	and	
continual evaluation of vital functions.
	•		Diagnosing	and	treating	clinical	problems	that	occur	during	the	
procedure.
	•		Administering	sedatives,	analgesics,	hypnotics,	anesthetic	agents,	or	
other medications as necessary to ensure patient safety and comfort.
	•		Providing	other	medical	services	as	needed	to	accomplish	the	safe	
completion of the procedure.
Anesthesia care often includes the administration of medications 
for which the loss of normal protective reflexes or loss of 
consciousness is likely.
Monitored anesthesia care
 refers to those clinical situations in which 
the patient remains able to protect the airway for the majority of 
the procedure.
If the patient is rendered unconscious and/or loses normal protective 
reflexes for an extended period, this is considered a general 
anesthetic.
LIGHT SEDATION
Administration of anxiolysis or analgesia that obtunds consciousness 
but does not obtund normal protective reflexes (cough, gag, 
swallow, hemodynamic) or spontaneous ventilation; patient 
responds normally to verbal commands.
MODERATE SEDATION
No interventions are required to maintain a patent airway or 
spontaneous ventilation; patient responds purposefully to verbal 
commands either on their own or with light touch.
DEEP SEDATION
Sedation that obtunds consciousness and normal protective reflexes 
or possesses a significant risk of blunting normal protective 
reflexes (cough, gag, swallow, hemodynamic); hemodynamic and 
respiratory insufficiency may occur.
GENERAL ANESTHESIA
Administration of hypnosis, sedation, and analgesia that results in 
the loss of normal protective reflexes.
REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
Induction of neural blockade (either central, neuraxial, epidural, or 
spinal; or peripheral nerve block, e.g., digital nerve block, brachial 
plexus block), which provides analgesia and is associated with 
regional motor blockade.
Consciousness is not obtunded.
Special expertise is required.
Frequently, in children, anxiolysis and sedation are also necessary for 
this technique to be successful.
Regional anesthesia (e.g., caudal epidural blockade) is used to 
supplement general anesthesia and provide postoperative 
analgesia.
LOCAL ANESTHESIA
Provision of analgesia by local infiltration of an appropriate 
anesthetic agent.
Does not require the presence or involvement of an anesthesiologist, 
although an anesthesiologist may provide local anesthesia services.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91
 u 
Anesthesia and  Perioperative Care 
669
Table 91.8 
 
  Selected Drugs Used in Anesthesia
DRUG
USES AND IMPLICATIONS
MUSCLE RELAXANTS
Succinylcholine
A depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent with rapid onset and offset properties
Used to facilitate endotracheal intubation and maintain muscle relaxation in emergency situations; rarely used
Associated with the development of malignant hyperthermia in susceptible patients
Degraded by plasma cholinesterase, which may be deficient in some individuals; such a deficiency may result in 
prolonged effect
Fasciculations may be associated with immediate increases in intracranial and intraocular pressures and 
 
postoperative muscle pain
Vecuronium, rocuronium, 
cisatracurium, all 
 
aminosteroids
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockers
Have less rapid onset than succinylcholine but are longer acting
Prolonged ICU use may lead to profound muscle weakness
Vecuronium and rocuronium are metabolized by the liver and excreted in bile; they are the most commonly used 
neuromuscular blocking agents
Cisatracurium is metabolized by plasma cholinesterase and therefore may be of benefit in patients with hepatic or 
renal disease
HYPNOTICS
Propofol
Rapid- acting hypnotic amnestic agent
No analgesic properties
Respiratory depressant
Increases seizure threshold
Antiemetic
Propofol	infusion	syndrome	may	occur	with	prolonged	intravenous	infusion	(>24	hr)
Etomidate
Cardiovascular stability on induction
Inhibits corticosteroid synthesis
Increases ICU mortality after use
Associated with myoclonus and pain on injection
Ketamine
Hypnotic analgesic
Causes sialorrhea and may be co- administered with an antisialagogue, such as atropine or glycopyrrolate
Induces endogenous catecholamine release and tachycardia
Bronchodilator
Increases intracranial and intraocular pressures
Decreases the seizure threshold
SEDATIVE- ANXIOLYTICS
Benzodiazepines
Produce sedation, anxiolysis, amnesia, and hypnosis
All agents raise the seizure threshold, are metabolized by the liver, and depress respiration, especially when 
 
administered with opioids
Effective as premedication
Diazepam may be painful on injection and has active metabolites
Midazolam can be administered by various routes
Lorazepam has no active metabolites
Reversed with flumazenil
Dexmedetomidine
Produces anxiolysis, sedation, and sympatholysis by 
α
2
- receptor stimulation centrally; has mild analgesic properties
Side effects include hypertension, hypotension, and bradycardia
Commonly used for procedural sedation; IV, IN, and IM dosing available
Continuous infusion useful for ICU sedation
ANALGESIC- SEDATIVES
Opioids
Gold standard for providing analgesia
All cause respiratory depression
Morphine and, to a lesser extent, hydromorphone may cause histamine release
The synthetic opioids fentanyl, sufentanil, and short- acting alfentanil may have a greater propensity to cause chest wall 
rigidity when administered rapidly or in high doses and are also associated with the rapid development of tolerance; 
these drugs have particular utility in cardiac surgery because of the hemodynamic stability associated with their use
Remifentanil is an ultrashort- acting synthetic opioid that is metabolized by plasma cholinesterase; it may have 
particular utility when deep sedation and analgesia are required along with the ability to assess neurologic status 
intermittently
INHALATIONAL AGENTS
Nitrous oxide
Produces amnesia and analgesia at low concentrations
Danger of hypoxic gas mixture if the oxygen concentration is not monitored and preventive safety mechanisms are 
not in place
Potent vapors, 
 
sevoflurane, desflurane, 
isoflurane
“Complete anesthetics”—induce hypnosis, analgesia, and amnesia
All are myocardial depressants, and some are vasodilators
May trigger malignant hyperthermia in susceptible individuals
Sevoflurane is used for induction of anesthesia in children
All bronchodilate at equipotent concentrations
Isoflurane and desflurane are associated with laryngospasm and should not be used for anesthesia induction
IV, Intravenous; IN, intranasal; IM, intramuscular.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

670 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
the nephrotoxin Compound A. Large- scale studies of sevoflurane- 
associated renal injury in humans are lacking. However, the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) has recommended maintenance of 
fresh gas flow rates >2 L/min for surgical cases lasting more than 2 
hours of monitored anesthesia care.
 
Isoflurane
Isoflurane is a pungent volatile anesthetic and airway irritant and is not 
suitable for induction because of the high incidence of complications, 
such as laryngospasm. However, maintenance of anesthesia with iso
-
flurane is common after induction with sevoflurane or an intravenous 
(IV) hypnotic. Emergence from anesthesia with isoflurane is slower 
than for sevoflurane. Isoflurane administration in the setting of desic
-
cated CO
2
 absorbents may yield the production of carbon monoxide.
 
Desflurane
Desflurane is a potent airway irritant associated with coughing, breath 
holding, and laryngospasm and is 
not
 useful for induction. Desflurane 
has the lowest solubility and potency of all commonly used volatile 
agents. It is frequently administered for maintenance of anesthesia. 
Emergence from desflurane anesthesia is rapid because of its low tissue 
solubility.
 
Nitrous Oxide
Nitrous oxide (N
2
O) is a tasteless, colorless, odorless gas with potent 
analgesic properties. It produces a state of euphoria (thus its nickname, 
“laughing gas”). The MAC of N
2
O is >100; consequently, it may not be 
used as a sole agent to maintain anesthesia. N
2
O produces little hemo
-
dynamic or respiratory depression. It is typically used in combination 
with volatile and IV anesthetic agents during maintenance of general 
anesthesia. The deleterious effects of N
2
O include postoperative nausea 
and vomiting (PONV) and, with long- term use (i.e., days), bone mar
-
row suppression. N
2
O diffuses out of blood rapidly and is contraindi
-
cated in patients with closed gas- filled body cavities (pneumothorax, 
lung cysts, bowel injury).
 
Intravenous Anesthetic Agents
IV anesthetics may be administered for induction and maintenance 
of anesthesia in bolus form or as continuous infusions. Common IV 
agents include propofol, opioids, benzodiazepines, ketamine, dexme
-
detomidine, and barbiturates. For children with vascular access, IV 
induction should be routine. All IV agents affect cardiorespiratory 
function.
Propofol
Propofol is the most commonly administered IV induction agent. 
Administered in doses of 2- 5 mg/kg, propofol rapidly produces 
unconsciousness. Propofol may burn and itch on injection. After 
induction of anesthesia, propofol is a useful agent for maintaining 
hypnosis and amnesia and may be used as a sole anesthetic agent 
for nonpainful procedures (e.g., radiation therapy) and imaging 
studies. When combined with opioids, propofol provides excellent 
anesthesia for brief painful procedures, such as lumbar puncture 
and bone marrow aspiration. Although hemodynamic stability, and 
even spontaneous respirations, may be maintained during propofol 
administration, it remains a potent anesthetic that can obtund air
-
way reflexes, respiration, and hemodynamic function. As such, some 
hospitals have limited its use to anesthesia professionals. Propofol 
may produce both respiratory depression and hypotension. Extra
-
pyramidal symptoms are a rarer complication. Prolonged use may 
cause hemodynamic collapse, bradycardia, metabolic acidosis, car
-
diac failure, rhabdomyolysis, hyperlipidemia, profound shock, and 
death 
(propofol infusion syndrome
). Prolonged propofol adminis
-
tration (>24- 48 hours) in the ICU in children is not recommended. 
Propofol is formulated in 10% soy emulsion with egg emulsifiers and 
was once thought to be contraindicated in patients with soy or egg 
allergy. According to the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and 
Immunology, patients with soy and egg allergies may safely receive 
propofol for anesthesia.
 
Etomidate
Etomidate is an imidazole derivative used for the induction of anes
-
thesia, frequently in emergent situations. Its onset of action is slower 
than propofol. Etomidate lacks significant cardiovascular depressant 
effects, making it a popular induction agent in patients with hemody
-
namic compromise and cardiac disease. However, etomidate inhibits 
11
β
- hydroxylase, thereby suppressing mineralocorticoid and gluco
-
corticoid synthesis for up to 72 hours after a single induction dose. 
Etomidate is associated with increased mortality when used as a seda
-
tive in the ICU (for which it is contraindicated); the effect of a single 
induction dose on mortality remains controversial. Any decision to use 
etomidate must weigh the short- term benefits of hemodynamic stabil
-
ity with the serious risks of adrenal suppression.
 
Ketamine
Ketamine 
(1- 3 mg/kg IV) produces rapid induction of general anes
-
thesia that lasts for 15- 30 minutes. Ketamine is effective when given 
intramuscularly (IM), subcutaneously (SC), intranasally (IN), or orally 
(PO). However, the dose must be increased for alternative routes. Ket
-
amine dissociates connections between the cerebral cortex and limbic 
system 
(dissociative anesthesia)
 through inhibition of 
N
- methyl- 
d
- 
aspartate receptors. Ketamine is also an analgesic and may be used as 
a sole IV agent to provide general anesthesia. It has few side effects 
and generally preserves blood pressure and cardiac output. However, 
ketamine increases myocardial oxygen demand and should be used 
cautiously in patients with impaired myocardial oxygen delivery or 
ventricular outflow tract obstruction. With low- dose (1- 2 mg/kg) 
ketamine, airway reflexes and spontaneous ventilation may be main
-
tained; at higher doses (3- 5 mg/kg), loss of airway reflexes, apnea, and 
respiratory depression occur. Aspiration of gastric contents remains a 
risk during deep sedation with ketamine. IV ketamine is a useful gen
-
eral anesthetic agent for short procedures.
Ketamine has been linked to disturbing postanesthetic dreams and 
hallucinations after emergence from anesthesia. In adults the incidence 
of this effect is 30–50%; in prepubertal children it may be 5–10%. 
Benzodiazepines (e.g., midazolam) reduce these sequelae and may be 
given to children receiving ketamine. Ketamine is also a potent secre
-
tagogue, enhancing oral and bronchial secretions. An antisialagogue, 
such as atropine or glycopyrrolate, should also be considered before 
the administration of ketamine. Ketamine is a bronchodilator and is 
a useful agent for sedating patients with asthma in the ICU. Ketamine 
has been reported to increase ICP and therefore is contraindicated in 
patients with elevated ICP.
 
Opioids
Opioids are superb analgesics for painful procedures and postproce
-
dural pain (see Chapters 92 and 93
). Opioids are respiratory depres
-
sants that suppress CO
2
 responsiveness and can produce apnea. 
Importantly, in equianalgesic doses, all opioids are equally potent 
respiratory depressants. Other inhalational or IV anesthetics generally 
potentiate opioid- induced respiratory depression.
Morphine
 is a long- acting opioid analgesic with important age- 
dependent pharmacokinetics. Equivalent doses of morphine per kilo
-
gram are associated with higher blood levels in neonates than in older 
children, with plasma concentrations approximating three times those 
of adults. Morphine exhibits a longer elimination half- life (14 hours) 
in young children than in adults (2 hours). The immature blood- brain 
barrier of neonates is more permeable to morphine. Morphine is 
often associated with hypotension and bronchospasm from histamine 
release and should be used with caution in children with asthma. Mor
-
phine has renally excreted active metabolites and is relatively contra
-
indicated in renal failure. Because of morphine’s prolonged duration of 
action and cardiorespiratory side effects, the fentanyl class of synthetic 
opioids has increased in popularity for perioperative analgesia.
Fentanyl
 is a potent synthetic opioid with a shorter duration of 
action and a more stable hemodynamic profile than morphine. Fen
-
tanyl attenuates the hemodynamic response to surgery and provides 
stable operating conditions. Effective analgesia and anesthesia may be 
provided with IV fentanyl administered as a 2- 3 
μ
g/kg bolus followed 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91
 u 
Anesthesia and  Perioperative Care 
671
by a 1- 3 
μ
g/kg/hr continuous 
infusion. Nitrous- narcotic anesthetic 
techniques that incorporate fentanyl are effective for maintenance 
of stable hemodynamics while still providing adequate hypnosis and 
analgesia. Fentanyl is the most commonly used 
synthetic
 opioid, but 
other formulations of varying potency are available (alfentanil < fen
-
tanyl < sufentanil). 
Sufentanil
 is ten times more potent than fentanyl 
and is frequently used during pediatric cardiac anesthesia. 
Alfentanil
 
is approximately 25% as potent as fentanyl. 
Remifentanil
 has very rapid 
onset and offset of action. In doses of 0.25 
μ
g/kg/min, surgical anes
-
thesia can be maintained with this agent. Remifentanil is metabolized 
through nonspecific ester hydrolysis and has a short elimination half- 
life (<10 minutes), advantageous for rapid emergence from anesthesia. 
Unfortunately, this short duration of action has been linked to inade
-
quate postprocedural analgesia and increased need for postprocedural 
opioid analgesic supplementation, limiting remifentanil’s use.
 

Benzodiazepines induce hypnosis, anxiolysis, sedation, and amnesia 
and have anticonvulsant properties. In high doses, benzodiazepines 
cause respiratory depression and are synergistic with opioids and bar
-
biturates in their respiratory depressant effects. Benzodiazepines are 
γ
- aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonists.
Midazolam
 is the most commonly used benzodiazepine in pediatric 
anesthesia. Short acting and water soluble, it can be injected without pain. 
It is a potent hypnotic- anxiolytic- anticonvulsant and is approximately four 
times more potent than diazepam. Midazolam may be administered orally, 
nasally, rectally, intravenously, or intramuscularly. Midazolam (0.10- 0.15 
mg/kg IV) has minimal effect on respiratory rate, heart rate, or blood 
pressure and provides excellent preoperative anxiolysis and amnesia. Pre
-
medication with oral midazolam (0.5- 1.0 mg/kg
) mixed in sweet- flavored 
syrup induces anxiolysis in approximately 90% of children without hemo
-
dynamic or respiratory depressant effects. However, children may expe
-
rience loss of coordination (head control), blurred vision, and rarely, 
dysphoria. A child sedated with midazolam should not be left unattended. 
Most children readily accept an inhalational anesthetic by face mask after 
oral midazolam premedication. The widespread use of preoperative oral 
midazolam has decreased the practice of PPI.
 

Dexmedetomidine is a central 
α
2
 adrenergic receptor agonist similar 
to clonidine. Dexmedetomidine lacks respiratory depressant effects 
and produces anxiolysis, sedation, mild analgesia, and sympatholy
-
sis. Rapid administration may produce hypertension and bradycardia, 
whereas continuous infusions may produce hypotension and bradycar
-
dia. Dexmedetomidine is frequently used for sedation in ICU patients 
and for procedures. Dexmedetomidine has become a popular adjuvant 
for general anesthesia during pediatric cardiac surgery.
 

Sodium thiopental
 is the classic barbiturate IV induction agent, 
although it is now rarely used. Side effects of thiopental include respi
-
ratory depression, apnea, and hypotension. Induction with 3- 5 mg/kg 
of thiopental 
produces unconsciousness within seconds, lasting 5- 10 
minutes. Thiopental is not useful for maintenance of anesthesia, which 
requires other IV or inhalational anesthetics. Pentobarbital is a barbi
-
turate traditionally administered IV for sedation in children during 
imaging procedures of intermediate duration (e.g., diagnostic studies) 
that require akinesia. 
Pentobarbital
 is a potent respiratory depressant, 
particularly when combined with opioids and benzodiazepines. Pento
-
barbital has a prolonged duration of action. Pentobarbital sedation for 
nonpainful procedures generally results in delayed emergence. 
Sodium 
methohexital
 (Brevital) is another IV induction agent, similar to sodium 
thiopental in respiratory depressant effects. Barbiturates lack analgesic 
properties, and painful procedures require supplemental analgesia.
 
  
Neuromuscular blockade is performed to facilitate endotracheal intu
-
bation and akinesia during surgery. NMBAs may be 
depolarizing
 (e.g., 
succinylcholine) or 
nondepolarizing
 (e.g., vecuronium, rocuronium, 
cisatracurium). 
Succinylcholine
 has a high- risk profile in children. Its 
use is associated with postoperative pain from muscle spasms; hyper
-
kalemia; elevated intracranial, intraocular, and intragastric pressures; 
malignant hyperthermia; myoglobinuria; and renal damage. Conse
-
quently, succinylcholine is rarely used, except to provide rapid relief 
of laryngospasm. Endotracheal intubation is most often facilitated 
with nondepolarizing NMBAs. 
Rocuronium
 is most commonly used 
for intubation because of its rapid onset of action. For procedures that 
last >40 minutes, 
vecuronium
 and 
cisatracurium
 are also suitable 
to induce muscle relaxation for intubation. After intubation, repeat 
administration of NMBAs may be indicated to maintain muscle relax
-
ation to facilitate surgery. Prolonged use of nondepolarizing NMBAs in 
critical illness may contribute to myopathy, especially when combined 
with high- dose corticosteroids.
 
INDUCTION OF GENERAL ANESTHESIA
The goal of induction of general anesthesia is the safe transition to a state 
of unconsciousness. Induction in children is typically achieved with 
inhalational anesthetics, although IV agents are indicated when patients 
have IV access. Many children will not tolerate the establishment of vas
-
cular access before induction of anesthesia, and it is routine to induce 
anesthesia by face mask with inhaled anesthetics. Before the induction 
of anesthesia, monitors applied may include pulse oximetry, ECG, and 
noninvasive blood pressure cuff. The child is then cautiously introduced 
to the face mask, which contains a high gas flow (5- 7 L/min O
2
), fre
-
quently mixed with N
2
O. Inhalation of N
2
O and O
2
 for 60- 90 seconds 
induces a state of euphoria. Nitrous oxide blunts the airway responses to 
potent volatile inhalational agents, and sevoflurane may then be safely 
introduced into the inhaled gas mixture. This leads to unconsciousness 
within 30- 60 seconds while the child continues to breathe spontaneously.
After induction, IV access is obtained and standard intraoperative mon
-
itoring initiated. Thereafter, definitive airway management is performed. 
Airway management for short procedures (i.e., myringotomy tubes) fre
-
quently includes a mask airway and spontaneous ventilation; this is safe 
when the airway is secure and patent and aspiration risk is low. Longer 
procedures (>30- 60 minutes) are not usually performed with mask air
-
ways. Definitive artificial airways include laryngeal mask airways and 
endotracheal	tubes	(ETTs).	The	
laryngeal mask
 is a supraglottic airway 
generally reserved for procedures in spontaneously ventilating patients 
and does not effectively prevent the aspiration of gastric contents.
For complex surgical procedures, 
endotracheal intubation
 is gener
-
ally required (e.g., intraabdominal, intrathoracic, airway procedures). 
Although endotracheal intubation may be performed under deep inha
-
lational anesthesia, the depth of anesthesia required to attenuate air
-
way reflexes may produce hemodynamic instability. Therefore NMBAs 
are frequently administered to facilitate intubation. The depolarizing 
NMBA succinylcholine is rarely used, and nondepolarizing NMBAs 
such as rocuronium and vecuronium are most frequently used (see 
earlier). After muscle relaxation, direct laryngoscopy and endotracheal 
intubation	can	be	performed.	Correct	ETT	placement	is	confirmed	by	
direct laryngoscopy, end- tidal CO
2
 measurement, and assessment of 
bilaterally equal breath sounds. Additional confirmatory tests include 
chest radiograph and fiberoptic bronchoscopy. After endotracheal 
intubation, controlled mechanical ventilation is required in the setting 
of neuromuscular blockade (see 
Chapter 86
).
Children with full stomach precautions may require 
rapid sequence 
induction
. Before performing a rapid sequence induction, preoxy
-
genation with 100% oxygen for 2- 5 minutes increases alveolar oxygen 
content and delays hypoxemia if intubation is difficult. Rapid sequence 
induction involves concurrent administration of hypnotic agents and 
NMBAs. Assisted ventilation before or after drug administration is 
avoided because of the risk of gastric distention, regurgitation, and 
aspiration.	Traditionally,	after	administering	a	sedative	and	NMBA,	the	
Sellick maneuver (cricoid pressure) was performed by applying firm 
pressure in a posterior direction against the cricoid cartilage. This dis
-
places the cricoid cartilage into the esophagus and was thought to form 
an artificial sphincter to prevent reflux of the gastroesophageal con
-
tents. However, evidence suggests that cricoid pressure may be coun
-
terproductive, as it does not appear to prevent pulmonary aspiration 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

672 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
and may increase time to intubation. Because of this controversy, the 
clinician must consider the risks and benefits of cricoid pressure in 
each case.
The major risk of rapid sequence induction is intubation failure. In 
this situation the child is paralyzed without a protected airway, and 
ventilation may be hazardous or impossible. Only experienced air
-
way specialists should undertake rapid sequence induction. It should 
be avoided in patients with a history of failed endotracheal intuba
-
tion or features (micrognathia) associated with difficult intubation. 
Under these circumstances, bronchoscopic awake intubation may be 
indicated.
Complications During Induction
During induction of anesthesia, the transition between full wake
-
fulness to unconsciousness is fraught with potential complications, 
including laryngospasm, bronchospasm, vomiting, and aspiration. 
Concerns for vomiting and aspiration dictate adherence to preanes
-
thetic fasting guidelines and may be an indication for rapid sequence 
anesthetic induction.
During induction of anesthesia, especially with inhalational anes
-
thetics, a period of excitement may occur. This period is associated with 
heightened airway reflexes, which can lead to coughing, gagging, laryn
-
gospasm, and bronchospasm. 
Laryngospasm
 is the reflex closure of the 
larynx, which prevents spontaneous or assisted ventilation. The child 
may make violent inspiratory efforts against a closed glottis, generat
-
ing significantly negative intrathoracic pressure and resulting in posto
-
bstructive pulmonary edema. Laryngospasm can be prolonged, and 
hypoxia may ensue. Laryngospasm occurs in up to 2% of all anesthetic 
inductions in children <9 years old and is much less common in older 
patients. Laryngospasm occurs twice as frequently in children with 
active or recent upper respiratory tract infection. A history of tobacco 
exposure increases the likelihood of laryngospasm significantly.
Laryngospasm can be relieved by increasing the depth of anesthesia, 
either intravenously or through inhalation (although with the glottis closed, 
further administration of inhalational anesthesia is not possible). Neuro
-
muscular blockade relieves laryngospasm, and an acute situation may be 
an indication for succinylcholine administration. Continuous positive 
airway pressure administration may be beneficial in alleviating laryngo
-
spasm. Laryngospasm may also occur during emergence from anesthesia 
because airway tone is increased during the transition to wakefulness.
Bronchospasm
 may result from increased airway reactivity during 
the hyperexcitable stage of induction or secondary to histamine release 
induced by anesthetic agents. Endotracheal intubation may provoke 
bronchospasm, especially in patients with asthma, which may be asso
-
ciated with life- threatening hypoxemia and inability to ventilate. Alter
-
native airway management strategies such as laryngeal mask should 
be considered when appropriate in children with severe reactive air
-
way disease. The use of histamine- releasing anesthetic agents has been 
associated with severe bronchospasm and, in rare instances, cardiore
-
spiratory failure. Environmental tobacco smoke is another risk factor.
Hypoxemia during induction may be secondary to reduced functional 
residual capacity, atelectasis, and ventilation- perfusion (V
.
/Q
.
) mismatch. 
Volatile anesthetics blunt hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, further 
contributing to V
.
/Q
.
 abnormalities. 
Hypersecretion
 may result in airway 
obstruction and should managed with antisialagogues, such as glycopyr
-
rolate and atropine. The newer inhalation agents are less potent secre
-
tagogues, and the routine use of atropine premedication is much less 
common but often indicated when ketamine is used.
Hemodynamic complications may also develop during induction of 
anesthesia. 
Hypotension
 is common and may be exaggerated in the 
setting of hypervolemia, decreased myocardial function, or congenital 
heart disease. Inhalational anesthetics sensitize the myocardium to cir
-
culating catecholamines, and induction and excitement are associated 
with a hypercatecholaminergic state.
 
MAINTENANCE OF ANESTHESIA
Maintenance of anesthesia is the period between induction and emer
-
gence. The child should be unaware of pain, unresponsive to pain
-
ful stimuli, and physiologically supported. Anesthesia is typically 
maintained with a volatile anesthetic (e.g., isoflurane, sevoflurane) 
supplemented with opioid- based analgesia. IV hypnotic agents (e.g., 
dexmedetomidine, benzodiazepines) may be administered to augment 
hypnosis and amnesia. Choice of ventilatory strategy (spontaneous, 
assisted, or controlled) varies according to procedure type and patient 
condition (see 
Chapter 86
). Surgical trauma may result in hypothermia 
and hypovolemia caused by blood loss and significant fluid shifts (third 
spacing). Management of these physiologic disturbances is the respon
-
sibility of the anesthesiologist during maintenance.
Temperature Management
Thermoregulation
 is critical during anesthesia. The absence of move
-
ment and inhibition of shivering reduce thermogenesis. Although 
temperature sensing may remain normal, the autonomic response to 
hypothermia is reduced. Anesthetic agents cause vasoparesis, which 
further impairs thermoregulation and increases heat loss. In new
-
borns, inhalational anesthetics inhibit nonshivering thermogenesis 
from brown fat, increasing the risk for hypothermia. Mechanisms of 
heat loss during anesthesia include radiation, convection, evaporation, 
and conduction. Radiant and convective heat loss are most common 
and may be minimized by preheating the operating room and by use 
of radiant heat lamps and forced- air warming blankets. Humidification 
and warming of inspired gases may also be useful.
 
Fluid Management
Most anesthetics produce vasodilation and increase venous capaci
-
tance, effectively reducing myocardial preload. Surgical bleeding and 
insensible/third space fluid losses further contribute to intravascular 
volume depletion. Volume expansion with isotonic salt- containing 
solutions (normal saline, lactated Ringer, Plasma- Lyte) may be 
required to maintain cardiac output and organ perfusion. Increased 
renin- angiotensin- aldosterone axis activation and antidiuretic hor
-
mone (ADH) secretion further complicate fluid regulation.
Intraoperative fluid management must account for (1) deficits 
acquired during preoperative fasting, (2) maintenance fluid require
-
ments, (3) surgical blood loss, and (4) insensible fluid loss. Infants 
should receive glucose- containing isotonic fluid to prevent periop
-
erative hypoglycemia. 
Table	91.9
 is a guideline for determining fluid 
deficits and maintenance requirements in the OR. For longer proce
-
dures, fluid deficits should be replaced with isotonic fluid over the first 
3 hours of intraoperative management. Deficits are generally calculated 
as the number of hours of fasting status multiplied by the hourly main
-
tenance rate for the child. Half the deficit is replaced during the first 
hour and half during the subsequent 2 hours. If hypotension or tachy
-
cardia persists in the early stages of anesthesia, more rapid replacement 
of the fluid deficit may be indicated.
Third space interstitial fluid losses should be replaced with isotonic 
salt solutions. For smaller operations, such as herniorrhaphy, pylo
-
romyotomy, and minor procedures, fluid replacement at 3- 5 mL/kg/
hr is indicated for insensible losses. Complex abdominal or thoracic 
procedures with large insensible losses may require an additional 8- 10 
mL/kg/hr of IV fluid replacement. Crystalloid solution is indicated for 
blood loss as a 3:1 ratio. Allogenic blood products should be replaced 
as a 1:1 ratio. Colloid (albumin) administration also may decrease the 
amount of crystalloid replacement needed for blood loss. During large- 
volume transfusions, active fluid warming should be performed to pre
-
vent hypothermia. With major surgery and resultant SIRS, capillary 
Table 91.9 
 
  Intraoperative Pediatric Fluid Replacement
INFUSION RATE
PATIENT WEIGHT
4
 mL/kg/hr
1- 10 kg
2 mL/kg/hr
10- 20 kg
1 mL/kg/hr
per	kg	>20	kg
Example:
 22 kg child requires (4 × 10) + (2 × 10) + (1 × 2) = 62 mL/hr
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91
 u 
Anesthesia and  Perioperative Care 
673
integrity is lost, and third space losses are common. Failure to replace 
fluid loss and restore intravascular volume may lead to shock.
Perioperative 
hypoglycemia
 may result from preoperative fast
-
ing, most often in neonates or in children with metabolic disor
-
ders. In neonates, perioperative glucose monitoring is indicated, 
and glucose replacement is frequently required. In older children 
with normal nutritional status, isotonic salt solutions without glu
-
cose are adequate. In patients receiving total parenteral alimenta
-
tion containing high glucose concentrations (>10%), continuous 
 
glucose administration should be ensured to avoid rebound 
hypoglycemia.
Postprocedural care includes supervision of emergence and recovery 
from anesthesia and surgery. 
Emergence
 describes the transition period 
between the anesthetized state and consciousness. During emergence, 
patients experience decreased anesthetic effect and increased physiologic 
and psychologic responses to painful stimuli (e.g., reactive autonomic 
tone, excitement, anxiety). Inhalational anesthetic agents are rapidly 
excreted during ventilation, and muscle relaxants can be reversed; how
-
ever, the effects of opioids, benzodiazepines, and IV hypnotics may be 
prolonged. Normal physiologic functions such as spontaneous ventilation 
resume, and hemodynamic function improves. Before leaving the OR after 
routine elective procedures, the child should be conscious with intact air
-
way reflexes and a patent airway. The effects of muscle relaxants should 
be reversed. Ideally, emergence should be as brief as possible, with main
-
tenance of analgesia and anxiolysis and restoration of cardiorespiratory 
function. However, critically ill patients scheduled for ICU admission may 
require postoperative endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. 
In these patients, deeper levels of sedation and analgesia should be main
-
tained after the procedure.
During emergence, it is essential to assess whether 
residual neuro
-
muscular blockade
 (NMB) exists. If weakness or respiratory depression 
is observed in the postoperative phase, prolonged NMB should be con
-
sidered. 
Reversal of residual NMB is standard anesthetic practice.
 With the 
virtual abandonment of succinylcholine, only nondepolarizing NMBAs 
are routinely used for intubation. The termination of NMB depends on 
metabolism and elution away from the neuromuscular junction. Classi
-
cally, nondepolarizing muscle relaxants are reversed by increasing the 
acetylcholine concentration at the neuromuscular junction with acetyl
-
choline esterase inhibitors (neostigmine, edrophonium), which work 
through competitive antagonism. Vagolytic agents (e.g., atropine, glyco
-
pyrrolate) must be co- administered to prevent bradycardia. This process, 
even for the shortest- acting muscle relaxant, rocuronium, can take several 
minutes. An intubating dose of rocuronium to rapidly induce paralysis in 
emergency situations may not spontaneously reverse for 20 minutes or 
longer (compared with about 3 minutes for succinylcholine). The effects 
of long- acting, nondepolarizing NMBAs (vecuronium, pancuronium) are 
invariably reversed. Acetylcholine esterase inhibitor efficacy is dependent 
on the degree of NMB at the time of administration, and residual NMB is 
common despite reversal with these agents. 
Sugammadex
 is an alterna
-
tive reversal agent that has a very low rate of residual NMB induced by 
the aminosteroids rocuronium and vecuronium. Its mechanism of action 
involves noncompetitive antagonism through encapsulation of neuromus
-
cular agents.
 
POSTANESTHESIA CARE UNIT
In the postanesthesia care unit (PACU), the child is observed until 
there is adequate recovery from anesthesia. Achievement of spontane
-
ous breathing, adequate pulse oximetry saturation (
>
95%), and hemo
-
dynamic stability are key recovery end- points. The child should be 
arousable, responsive, and oriented before discharge from the PACU. 
The amount of time spent in the PACU varies based on disposition 
(transfer to acute care or ICU, transfer to day surgery postrecovery 
unit, or discharge to home). Parents should be permitted to comfort 
their children in the PACU. Discharge from the PACU depends on 
the child’s overall functional status, which includes physiologic end- 
points, adequate analgesia, and control of PONV. Various scoring sys
-
tems have been used for determining readiness for discharge from the 
PACU (
Table	91.10
).
Postanesthetic Complications
Respiratory insufficiency
 after general anesthesia is common. Pro
-
longed emergence from anesthesia and respiratory depression may be 
caused by the residual effects of opioids, hypnotic agents, or NMBAs. 
Pain may also cause significant hypoventilation, especially after tho
-
racic or abdominal surgery. Delayed emergence from anesthesia may 
result from retention of inhaled anesthetics worsened by hypoven
-
tilation. Hypothermia, especially in neonates, delays metabolism 
and excretion of anesthetics and prolongs neuromuscular blockade. 
Hypoventilation after surgery is associated with the development of 
atelectasis
. Microatelectasis may lead to postoperative infections. 
When airway obstruction is present, maintenance of airway patency 
may necessitate oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway placement. 
In the setting of profound respiratory depression, endotracheal intuba
-
tion and mechanical ventilation may be indicated.
Opioid reversal with naloxone may be indicated in rare instances 
when excessive 
opioid effect
 is suspected. However, naloxone reverses 
both the respiratory depressant and the analgesic properties. After nal
-
oxone administration, a somnolent child with respiratory depression 
may experience increased pain. Opioid reversal requires bedside atten
-
tion by the physician to monitor the child’s behavioral, hemodynamic, 
and respiratory status. Importantly, naloxone is shorter acting than 
most opioid analgesics, which may result in renarcotization.
Postoperative stridor
 occurs in up to 2% of all pediatric patients. The 
use	of	appropriately	sized	ETTs	and	assurance	of	an	air	leak	<30	cm	H
2
O 
able 91.10 
 
  Postanesthesia Recovery Scores
ALDRETE RECOVERY SCORE
≥
9 REQUIRED 
FOR DISCHARGE
ACTIVITY—VOLUNTARILY OR ON COMMAND
Moves four extremities
2
Moves two extremities
1
No motion
0
BREATHING
Deep breath, cough, cry
2
Dyspnea or shallow breathing
1
Apnea
0
BLOOD PRESSURE
Within 20% of preanesthetic value
2
Within 20–50% of preanesthetic value
1
>50%	outside	preanesthetic	value
0
COLOR
Pink
2
Pale, blotchy, dusky
1
Cyanotic
0
CONSCIOUSNESS
Fully aware, responds
2
Arouses to stimulus
1
Unresponsive
0
STEWARD RECOVERY SCORE
6 REQUIRED FOR 
DISCHARGE
ACTIVITY
Moves limbs purposefully
2
Nonpurposeful movement
1
Still
0
CONSCIOUSNESS
Awake
2
Responsive
1
Unresponsive
0
AIRWAY
Coughing on command or crying
2
Maintaining patent airway
1
Requires airway maintenance
0
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

674 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
pressure decreases the risk of airway trauma or edema. A history of stridor 
increases the likelihood of postoperative complications. Stridor may be 
severe enough after extubation to require reintubation. Racemic epineph
-
rine aerosols and dexamethasone are commonly employed therapies; their 
use requires prolonged observation because of the potential for rebound 
stridor. Stridor in infants may be an indication for overnight observation.
Cardiovascular complications
 are less frequently encountered in the 
PACU. Fluid administration may be required to augment cardiac output, 
perfusion, and urine output. Large- volume fluid resuscitation (>30 mL/
kg) in the postoperative period may be an indication of evolving shock 
physiology, and sources of hypovolemia (e.g., occult bleeding) or myocar
-
dial dysfunction (e.g., tamponade, pneumothorax) should be considered.
Emergence delirium
 immediately after anesthesia is noted in 5–10% 
of children and is more common in those 3- 9 years old. Manifestations 
include restlessness, combativeness, disorientation, and inconsolabil
-
ity. Almost all anesthetic agents have been linked to the development of 
delirium, especially newer volatile anesthetic agents (e.g., sevoflurane, 
desflurane). Potential postoperative complications, such as hypoglyce
-
mia and hypoxemia, should also be ruled out. Occasionally, it is neces
-
sary to provide additional sedation (e.g., propofol, dexmedetomidine, 
benzodiazepines), although these agents prolong postanesthesia recov
-
ery time and may not effectively reduce delirium.
Awareness During Anesthesia
A fundamental aim of anesthesia is to prevent recall by inducing hyp
-
nosis and amnesia. In adults, certain anesthetic techniques and surgical 
procedures have been associated with increased incidence of recall. The 
long- term sequelae of recall in children are unknown. Continuous cerebral 
bispectral index (BIS) electroencephalographic monitoring has been used 
to assess consciousness and aid in the prevention of intraoperative aware
-
ness. Unfortunately, pediatric studies have not confirmed the usefulness of 
BIS monitoring as a means of determining anesthetic depth. Existing data 
do not support the routine use of BIS monitoring during pediatric anesthe
-
sia. Volatile anesthetic agents reliably produce dose- dependent hypnotic 
and amnestic effects and remain a mainstay of general anesthesia.
 
Postoperative Nausea and Vomiting
After general anesthesia, 40–50% of children may experience PONV 
that generally lasts for several hours. This complication prolongs 
recovery room times and requires significant nursing attention. The 
etiology is not completely understood but is likely multifactorial and 
related to the emetic effects of anesthetics, pain, and surgical stress. 
Opioid analgesics may also provoke nausea and vomiting. Other risk 
factors for PONV include surgery lasting greater than 30 minutes, age 
≥
3 years, strabismus surgery, and a history of PONV in the patient or 
their relatives. Importantly, preoperative fasting does not decrease the 
incidence of PONV. Indeed, hydration and glucose supplementation 
appear to be important factors in decreasing PONV. Multimodal anal
-
gesia with nonopioid agents (e.g., acetaminophen, ibuprofen, ketoro
-
lac) and regional or local anesthesia may be associated with reduced 
PONV. The serotonin antagonist ondansetron is an effective treatment 
of PONV. Ondansetron prophylaxis is recommended for patients at 
increased risk of PONV. Serotonin antagonists are contraindicated in 
children taking serotonin reuptake inhibitors for migraine headaches. 
Dexamethasone may also be used for the treatment of PONV.
 
Thermoregulation and Malignant Hyperthermia
After anesthesia, thermoregulation remains abnormal for several 
hours. 
Hypothermia
, especially in neonates, may be associated with 
cardiorespiratory depression and prolongation of the effect of opioids 
and NMBAs. Although hypothermia has deleterious effects, active 
rewarming should be performed cautiously to avoid hyperthermia and 
cutaneous burns. Postoperative shivering is common and may occur 
in the absence of hypothermia. 
Hyperthermia
, with temperatures in 
excess of 39°C (102.2°F), is of concern in the postoperative period. 
When high fevers occur within hours of the use of an inhalational 
anesthetic, especially if succinylcholine was used, malignant hyper
-
thermia (MH) must be ruled out.
Malignant hyperthermia
 is a hypermetabolic syndrome triggered by 
volatile anesthetic agents and succinylcholine. The onset of MH may be 
acute, fulminant, and lethal without appropriate interventions. The disease 
is genetically heterogeneous, with >10 genes contributing to susceptibil
-
ity, but typically displays an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. A 
family history of death or febrile reactions during anesthesia should alert 
the anesthesiologist to its potential. Pathogenic variants within the gene 
encoding for the ryanodine receptor (the calcium channel of the sarcoplas
-
mic reticulum) predispose to MH susceptibility and have been identified 
in 20–40% of humans with MH. Certain 
myopathies
 are associated with 
the risk of MH, including Duchenne muscular dystrophy, central core dis
-
ease, and King Denborough syndrome.
The pathophysiology of MH involves uncontrolled intracellular cal
-
cium release from skeletal muscle sarcolemma, resulting in prolonged 
muscle	contraction,	adenosine	triphosphate	(ATP)	depletion,	and	muscle	
cell death. Rhabdomyolysis results in the release of myoglobin, creatine 
phosphokinase (CPK), and potassium into the blood. The clinical course 
of MH is characterized by rapid onset of high fever (>38.5°C [101.3°F]), 
muscle rigidity, acidosis (metabolic and respiratory), high end- tidal CO
2
, 
and multiorgan dysfunction. Death may ensue secondary to hemody
-
namic collapse from shock and cardiac dysrhythmias. Signs of MH gener
-
ally occur within the first 2 hours of anesthesia but (rarely) can occur up 
to 24 hours later.
When MH is suspected, treatment involves discontinuation of all inha
-
lational anesthetics, correction of the metabolic acidosis, and administra
-
tion of the muscle relaxant dantrolene. The initial dose of dantrolene is 2.5 
mg/kg, and repeat doses, up to a maximum of 10 mg/kg
, are indicated for 
persistent fever, muscle rigidity, acidosis, and tachycardia. Once symptoms 
are controlled, the patient should be observed for at least 24 hours, because 
recrudescence may occur. The MH mortality rate was once >70% and is 
now <5% with standardized treatment algorithms. An MH cart with suffi
-
cient supplies of dantrolene should be present at every site where pediatric 
anesthesia is provided.
Certain phenomena suggest an increased risk of MH. Masseter spasm 
during induction, with rigid clenching of the masseter muscles and an 
inability to open the mouth, may signal MH susceptibility. Acute myoglo
-
binuria associated with an MH- triggering agent is another clue. The child 
may not be hypermetabolic or febrile but may have dark urine, high CPK 
levels, and risk of myoglobin- induced renal tubular damage. The finding of 
dark urine after administration of an anesthetic requires further investiga
-
tion, including measurement of electrolytes and CPK. Prevention of MH 
in susceptible patients requires the avoidance of triggering agents, which 
include inhalational anesthetics and succinylcholine. IV anesthesia and 
nitrous- opioid techniques are safe. MH- safe anesthesia machines devoid 
of trace concentrations of volatile anesthetic vapors should be used. Dan
-
trolene prophylaxis is not recommended because MH is rapidly treatable, 
and the drug causes respiratory depression and muscle weakness. For a 
child in whom MH is suspected, the MH hotline, 1- 800- MHHYPER 
(1- 800- 644- 9737), should be used to notify the Malignant Hyperthermia 
Association of the United States (MHAUS). MHAUS registers susceptible 
patients and provides diagnostic and therapeutic information. Preanesthe
-
sia susceptibility testing includes genetic analysis of the ryanodine receptor 
gene, muscle biopsies, in vitro contraction studies, and possibly measure
-
ment of muscle CO
2
 production in response to intramuscular caffeine.
 
Mediastinal Masses
Children with anterior mediastinal masses such as lymphomas, tera
-
tomas, and other primary mediastinal tumors are at serious risk for 
cardiorespiratory failure during anesthesia secondary to airway com
-
promise, difficult ventilation, cardiac tamponade, vascular obstruction, 
and circulatory collapse. These patients generally require surgical tis
-
sue diagnosis before treatment is initiated. Significant compression of 
vital	structures	can	occur	with	seemingly	mild	symptoms.	Tachypnea,	
orthopnea, wheezing, and avoidance of prone or supine positions are 
significant	indications	of	serious	risk.	Echocardiographic	or	CT	evi
-
dence of pericardial tamponade, right ventricular compression, or 
compression of the pulmonary artery suggests severe risk. Biopsy with 
light sedation under local anesthesia may be indicated. When anesthe
-
sia is required, preservation of spontaneous ventilation is critical during 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 91
 u 
Anesthesia and  Perioperative Care 
675
induction of anesthesia. Rigid bronchoscopy may be used to assist with 
ventilation in the setting of external airway compression. Provisions 
to provide mechanical circulatory support (cardiopulmonary bypass) 
should also be available. In high- risk children, consideration should 
be given to initiating treatment with corticosteroids, radiation therapy, 
and chemotherapy before obtaining a tissue diagnosis.
 
 
Neonates and infants are at increased risk for the development of post
-
operative apnea after exposure to potent hypnotic and analgesic medi
-
cations. Both central and obstructive apnea may occur. Postanesthetic 
apnea is most common within the first 12 hours, although apnea has 
been reported in premature infants up to 48 hours later. Risk factors for 
postoperative apnea include history of apnea, caffeine treatment, chronic 
hypoventilation, and anemia. The risk of apnea is inversely proportional 
to postconceptual age (PCA) at surgery and is highest in premature neo
-
nates less than 36 weeks estimated gestational age. This risk is minimal 
by the time premature infants have reached 60 weeks PCA. When sur
-
gery is required in early infancy, overnight observation and monitoring 
may be indicated. In term infants >44 weeks PCA without risk factors, 
management should include observation and monitoring for 6 hours 
with at least one sleep- wake- feed cycle without hypoxia, bradycardia, 
or supplemental oxygen. Premature infants with risk factors <52 weeks 
PCA require admission for observation for 12 hours after anesthesia.
 
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT
Postprocedural pain management should ensure adequate analgesia 
and anxiolysis (see 
Chapter 93
). Preoperative education focusing on 
pain management through development of skills designed to decrease 
anticipatory anxiety and participation in treatment planning can be 
helpful for children and families. Pediatric pain management relies 
on multimodal therapy, including opioid and nonopioid analgesics. 
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, cyclooxygenase- 2 inhibitors, 
acetaminophen, opioids, and regional analgesia all have roles in post
-
operative pain management. Repeated evaluation is critical to effective 
pain management. Adjunctive therapy, such as pet therapy, may also 
decrease the need for potent analgesics postoperatively.
Patient- controlled analgesia (PCA)
 and 
parent/nurse- controlled 
analgesia (PNCA)
 are widely accepted postoperative pain regimens. 
PCA/PNCA may be used to administer a low- dose continuous (basal) 
infusion of opioid with intermittent (bolus) supplements as needed. The 
practitioner must determine the basal rate, bolus dose, lockout inter
-
val, and acceptable number of bolus doses per hour. PCA/PNCA safety 
requires appropriate medication dosing and assumes that patients 
are unlikely to overdose because somnolence will limit repeated self- 
administration. In young children, proper PCA/PNCA use may be 
more difficult to ensure, although children as young as 5 years have 
been able to use PNCA successfully. In older children and adolescents, 
PCA is a standard modality of postoperative pain management.
Regional Anesthesia
Regional anesthesia is the use of anesthetics to block the conduction 
of afferent neural impulses to the central nervous system. Forms of 
regional anesthesia include local anesthesia, peripheral nerve blocks, 
nerve plexus blocks, and neuraxial (epidural and subarachnoid/spinal) 
blocks. Anesthetics may be administered as a single injection or as a 
continuous infusion. Regional anesthesia may be used for both intra
-
operative and postoperative analgesia and has been linked to short
-
ened recovery times and hospital stays in children. A major benefit 
of regional anesthesia is lesser central cardiorespiratory depressant 
effects. Injection of local anesthetics (e.g., lidocaine, bupivacaine) into 
the affected area may provide procedural analgesia lasting for hours 
to days. Wound infiltration with local anesthetics at the conclusion of 
surgery may also decrease early postoperative pain.
Neuraxial (epidural, spinal) analgesia
 is common in pediatric prac
-
tice. The epidural space lies between the dura and the pia and arachnoid 
membranes, an area through which all nerve roots pass. Caudal epidural 
analgesia is placed through the sacral hiatus, inferior to the distal end of 
the spinal cord. This site is often used for pelvic and lower- limb anesthesia 
during urologic and orthopedic surgery in infants and toddlers. A single 
dose of caudal epidural anesthesia may provide hours of pain relief, and 
a continuous infusion may provide effective pain relief for hours to days. 
The epidural injection of opioids can provide analgesia for 12- 24 hours and 
is a potential supplement to postoperative analgesia. Longer- acting local 
anesthetics (e.g., bupivacaine, ropivacaine) combined with an opioid (e.g., 
fentanyl, preservative- free morphine) are typically used in single- injection 
and continuous epidural therapy. It is also possible to provide epidural 
PCA with a continuous infusion pump and the patient’s ability to self- 
administer analgesia as needed. Epidural analgesia can also provide pain 
relief in patients with chronic pain or pain caused by advanced malignant 
conditions.
Complications of neuraxial anesthesia include cephalad spread of 
blockade with respiratory depression, paralysis of respiratory muscles, 
and brainstem depression. Common complications of neuraxial anal
-
gesia are paresthesias and, if opioids are used, pruritus, nausea, and 
vomiting. Neuraxial opioid use necessitates antipruritic and antiemetic 
therapy. Infection and epidural hematoma are extremely rare. Neur
-
axial opioids, especially when administered intrathecally, may cause 
respiratory depression and require postoperative monitoring.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
91.1
 Anesthetic Neurotoxicity
John P. Scott
Laboratory animal studies have suggested a link between anesthetic 
exposure at an early age and neurotoxicity in developing brains. Exist
-
ing nonclinical data implicate 
N
- methyl- 
d
- aspartate and 
γ
- aminobutyric 
acid (GABA) pathways in apoptosis and neuronal cell death. 
 
Histopathologic changes and adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes have 
been associated with exposure to both inhalational and IV anesthetics, 
including isoflurane, sevoflurane, ketamine, benzodiazepines, and propo
-
fol. Animal studies were initially performed in nonprimates (rodents), and 
controversy remains concerning experimental design (dose, duration of 
treatment, species differences). However, work in nonhuman primates has 
also shown an increased incidence of adverse neurodevelopmental out
-
comes after prolonged and/or multiple exposures to volatile anesthetics.
Human studies of anesthesia- induced neurotoxicity have yielded con
-
flicting results. Further complicating the situation are other potential 
triggers for adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes, including comorbidi
-
ties, surgical trauma, and perioperative cardiorespiratory status. Multiple 
population- based epidemiologic studies have suggested a potential asso
-
ciation between anesthetic exposure and adverse neurodevelopmental 
outcomes after multiple or prolonged anesthetic exposures. Large- scale 
European and Canadian cohort studies using national registries have 
revealed subtle differences in standardized psychometric testing of early 
school- age children after exposure to general anesthesia. Interestingly, 
other studies in children have failed to yield similar results. The Pediat
-
ric Anesthesia and Neurodevelopmental Assessment (PANDA), a mul
-
ticenter matched- sibling control study, revealed no association between 
brief anesthetic exposure for inguinal hernia repair and aptitude on psy
-
chometric testing. Similarly, the General Anaesthesia and Awake- Regional 
Anaesthesia in Infancy (GAS) study, a prospective multicenter random
-
ized controlled trial comparing general and neuraxial spinal anesthesia in 
infants for hernia repair, 
did not
 demonstrate any significant differences in 
neurodevelopment at 2 years of age between groups. A follow- up study at 5 
years of age similarly showed no difference in neurodevelopment between 
groups receiving general and spinal anesthesia. Importantly, studies have 
not shown an association between adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes 
and anesthetic exposure <3 hours.
Alternatives to general anesthesia for many procedures in young chil
-
dren do not exist. Regional anesthetic techniques and narcotic- based 
anesthetics may gain popularity. Dexmedetomidine may also have some 
neuroprotective properties. Currently, there are insufficient data to make 
conclusions regarding the safety of one anesthetic approach over another. 
Ultimately, the potential for neurotoxicity must be balanced against the 
necessity of providing adequate anesthesia for children presenting for 
surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

676 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
See also Chapters 91 and 93
.
Sedation
 describes the continuum between wakefulness and gen
-
eral anesthesia (see 
Table	91.7
). Many of the same medications used to 
induce general anesthesia may be used to provide sedation (see 
Table	
91.8
). Analogous to the provision of anesthesia, performance of pro
-
cedural sedation requires a comprehensive presedation evaluation, 
intraprocedural monitoring, and postsedation recovery care. The term 
conscious sedation
 refers to a condition in which a patient is sleepy, 
comfortable, and cooperative but maintains airway- protective and ven
-
tilatory reflexes. Depending on the choice of pharmacotherapy, seda
-
tion may not provide analgesia. Sedation that is sufficient to obtund 
painful responses describes deep sedation. 
Deep sedation
 is a state 
of unarousability to voice and may be accompanied by suppression of 
reflex responses, with preservation of ability to respond purposefully to 
repeated or painful stimulation.
Pediatric procedural sedation requires vigilance and knowledge to 
ensure safety and is governed by the same guidelines as anesthesia care 
(
Table	92.1
). Adherence to guidelines for appropriate monitoring and 
management of sedation in children is imperative. Sedative doses that 
cause minimal sedation in one patient may produce complete uncon
-
sciousness and apnea in another. Anxiolysis or light sedation with chlo
-
ral hydrate, benzodiazepines, and dexmedetomidine is often sufficient 
for nonpainful procedures. The use of dexmedetomidine for proce
-
dural sedation is safe, but recovery time can be prolonged and suc
-
cess variable. For painful procedures (e.g., bone marrow aspiration), 
the combination of hypnosis and analgesia is required. The addition 
of opioids to sedation regimens increases the risk of respiratory insuf
-
ficiency. Short- acting anesthetics (e.g., propofol, methohexital, remi
-
fentanil) provide effective procedural sedation, but their use carries a 
higher likelihood of inadvertent induction of general anesthesia. Use of 
these medications requires the presence of an anesthesiologist and/or 
specially trained, experienced, credentialed, and qualified physicians.
Many pediatric subspecialists provide sedation and anesthesia care 
for children. The use of anesthetic agents is not limited to anesthesi
-
ologists, but anesthesiology departments are obligated to help develop, 
manage,	and	oversee	sedation	services.	Together,	hospitals	and	provid
-
ers, including anesthesiologists, share responsibility for the oversight 
and credentialing of individuals administering sedation and anesthesia.
The elements of a safe pediatric procedural sedation system include 
the following:
	•		Clearly	defined	knowledge	and	skill	sets
	•		Adequate	prerequisite	training
	•		Credentialing	of	providers
	•		Maintenance	of	certification
	•		Ensuring	that	sedation	sites	meet	recognized	standards
	•		Continuous	quality	improvement
Table	92.2
 provides an approach to proper language to help the child 
cope with procedural pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Chapter 
92
Procedural Sedation
John P. Scott
Table 92.1 
 
  Systematic Approach to Sedation in Children
Comprehensive medical history and organ system assessment, 
 
anticipating underlying medical problems that predispose the 
patient to anesthetic complications
Careful physical examination focused on the cardiorespiratory 
 
system and airway
Appropriate fasting
Informed consent
Pediatric drug dosing (mg/kg)
Appropriately sized equipment
Documentation of vital signs and condition on a time- based record
Rapid response (“code”) team to respond to emergencies with 
“crash cart”
Fully equipped and staffed recovery area
Discharge criteria documenting recovery from sedation
Table 92.2 
 
  Suggested Language for Parents and Healthcare Providers
LANGUAGE TO AVOID
LANGUAGE TO USE
You will be fine; there is nothing to worry about. (reassurance)
What did you do in school today? (distraction)
This is going to hurt/this will not hurt. (vague; negative focus)
It might feel like a pinch. (sensory information)
The nurse is going to take some blood. (vague information)
First, the nurse will clean your arm, you will feel the cold alcohol pad, and next 
 
. . . (sensory and procedural information)
You are acting like a baby. (criticism)
Let’s get your mind off of it; tell me about that film . . . (distraction)
It will feel like a bee sting. (negative focus)
Tell me how it feels. (information)
The procedure will last as long as . . . (negative focus)
The procedure will be shorter than . . . (television program or other familiar time 
for child) (procedural information; positive focus)
The medicine will burn. (negative focus)
Some children say they feel a warm feeling. (sensory information; positive focus)
Tell me when you are ready. (too much control)
When I count to 3, blow the feeling away from your body. (coaching to cope; 
distraction- limited control)
I am sorry. (apologizing)
You are being very brave. (praise; encouragement)
Do not cry. (negative focus)
That was hard; I am proud of you. (praise)
It is over. (negative focus)
You did a great job doing the deep breathing, holding still . . . (labeled praise)
Adapted from Krauss BS, Calligaris L, Green SM, Barbi E. Current concepts in management of pain in children in the emergency department. 
Lancet
. 2016;387:83–92.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
677
Pain is both a sensory and an emotional experience. Infants, children, 
and adolescents experience a wide range of acute and chronic pain eti
-
ologies. When unrecognized and undertreated, pain extracts a signifi
-
cant physiologic, biochemical, and psychologic toll on both the child 
and the family. Many disease processes and most interventional diag
-
nostic or treatment procedures in pediatrics are associated with pain. 
Similarly, traumatic, developmental, cognitive, psychologic, and social 
experiences can also trigger and maintain chronic pain.
DEFINITION AND CATEGORIES OF PAIN
The International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) defines 
pain
 
as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with, 
or resembling that associated with, actual or potential tissue damage.” 
Furthermore, the IASP expanded the definition to include the follow
-
ing six key notes:
 1.  Pain is always a personal experience that is influenced to varying 
degrees by biologic, psychologic, and social factors.
 2.  Pain and nociception are different phenomena. Pain cannot be in
-
ferred solely from activity in sensory neurons.
 3.  Through their life experiences, individuals learn the concept of pain.
 4.  A person’s report of an experience as pain should be respected.
 5.  Although pain usually serves an adaptive role, it may have adverse 
effects on function and social and psychologic well- being.
 6.  Verbal description is only one of several behaviors to express pain; 
inability to communicate does not negate the possibility that a hu
-
man experiences pain.
Important elements to emphasize in this definition are (1) pain 
encompasses both peripheral physiologic and central neural compo
-
nents and (2) pain may or may not be associated with ongoing tissue 
damage. The experience of pain lies primarily in the strength and pat
-
terning of central neural connectivity (
Fig. 93.1
). Although immediate 
upstream neural activation can originate from inflammatory, struc
-
tural, or biochemical events, processes not only in the periphery but 
also in the spinal cord and the brain influence the intensity and dura
-
tion of pain. Similarly, central neural processes in the brain are asso
-
ciated with the location, intensity, and distress associated with pain. 
Chronic pain can develop when the upstream neural signaling contin
-
ues to activate central neural circuits, such as with continued periph
-
eral inflammatory or structural pain- associated processes. Sometimes, 
this signaling does not regress and the individual experiences ongoing 
chronic pain after the resolution of the original process.
Often, however, pediatricians face the most difficult problems when 
either acute pain becomes chronic or chronic pain develops and is 
maintained without a definable infectious, inflammatory, metabolic, 
or structural cause. When no “cause” can be found, patients are often 
referred to mental health specialists, or the cause for the pain is labeled 
as “stress.” Children read this message as, “The doctor thinks I am 
faking pain, or I am crazy.” Parents see their child suffering and often 
seek care from additional providers, with the child undergoing numer
-
ous tests, procedures, medication trials, and visits and many physi
-
cians looking for the cause of the pain so it can be “fixed” or to “get 
an answer.” Meanwhile, the child is often missing school, social, and 
physical activities. In addition, they often develop poor sleep habits, 
nonrestorative sleep, and exhibit increasing fatigue.
It is recognized that chronic pain, in the absence of a specific identi
-
fied structural, biochemical, or inflammatory cause, develops through 
the initiation, maintenance, and strength of central neural connectivity 
patterns (see 
Chapter 212
). 
Centrally mediated pain
 derives from neural 
connectivity patterns in the brain that include centers involved in auto
-
nomic nervous system control, memory, and other cognitive centers, as 
well as emotional centers of the brain. In pediatrics, birth history and 
child development overlay these central patterns that contribute to the 
development of chronic pain. Parents may understand the concept of 
a “sticky nervous system” as the perpetuator of the continued pain in 
such a child. This model of brain connectivity patterns, or “top- down” 
mediators of chronic pain, is important, because it explains how psy
-
chologic and other nonpharmacologic interventions work to reduce 
chronic pain and suffering.
Table	93.1
 specifies important pain categories typically treated 
(somatic, visceral, and neuropathic) and defines the elements and 
characteristics of 
nociception
, the peripheral physiologic aspect of 
pain perception. Nociception refers to how specialized fibers (largely, 
but not exclusively, the small, unmyelinated A- delta and C fibers) in the 
peripheral nervous system transmit nerve impulses (usually transmit
-
ting signals originating from peripheral mechanoreceptors and chemo
-
receptors) through synapses in the spinal cord’s dorsal horn through 
(but not exclusively through) the spinothalamic tracts to the brain’s 
higher centers, where the development of neural connectivity patterns 
creates the experience of pain.
 
ASSESSMENT AND MEASUREMENT OF 
 
PAIN IN CHILDREN
Assessing pain entails much more than merely quantifying it. When
-
ever feasible, the physician should ask the patient about the charac
-
ter, location, quality, duration, frequency, and intensity of the pain. 
Depending on their age, children may be able to answer some or all the 
questions independently or with assistance from their parents. Sever
-
ity can also be assessed via utilization of various scales, which will be 
discussed later. Some children may not report pain because of fears of 
talking to strangers, disappointing, or bothering others, receiving an 
injection if they report pain, returning to the hospital if they admit to 
pain, and other negative reactions. For infants and nonverbal children, 
their parents, pediatricians, nurses, and other caregivers are constantly 
challenged to interpret whether the child’s distressed behaviors repre
-
sent pain, fear, hunger, or a range of other perceptions or emotions. 
Similarly, lack of normal interest in play without behavioral distress 
signals can be manifestations of pain. Therapeutic trials of comfort 
measures (cuddling, feeding) and analgesic medication may be helpful 
in clarifying the triggers of the behaviors.
Behavior and physiologic signs are useful but can be misleading. A 
toddler may scream and grimace during an ear examination because of 
fear rather than pain. Conversely, children with inadequately relieved 
persistent pain from cancer, sickle cell disease, trauma, or surgery 
may withdraw from their surroundings and appear very quiet, lead
-
ing observers to conclude falsely that these children are comfortable 
or sedated. In adolescents, increased reports of pain may be misinter
-
preted as “drug seeking” behaviors. In these situations, it is important 
to assess pain appropriately and determine how to best improve pain 
and function. Although this may be best accomplished by adjustment 
to analgesic medications, it may also involve the optimization of other 
nonpharmacologic techniques. This approach, although increasing the 
number or amount of interventions, may make the child become more, 
not less, interactive and alert as pain control improves. Similarly, neo
-
nates and young infants may close their eyes, furrow their brows, and 
clench their fists in response to pain. Adequate analgesia is often asso
-
ciated with eye opening and increased involvement in surroundings. A 
child who is experiencing significant chronic pain may play normally 
to distract attention away from pain. These coping behaviors are some
-
times misinterpreted as evidence of the child’s “faking” or exaggerating 
pain.
Age- Specific and Developmentally Specific Measures
Because infants, young children, and nonverbal children cannot express 
the quantity of pain they experience, several pain scales have been 
devised attempting to quantify pain in these populations (
Fig. 93.2
 and 
Table	93.2
).
Chapter 
93
Pediatric Pain 
Management
Stacy J.B. Peterson and Steven J. Weisman
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

678 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
A
BPrimary somatosensory cortexMedialprefrontalcortex  Anteriorinsula Superior longitudinal fasciculusPosterior corona radiataPosterior insulaThalamusPeriaqueductal grayDefault mode networkSalience networkRostral ventromedialmedullaPrimarysomatosensory cortex Temporoparietal junctionSensorimotor networkWhite matter bundlesPosteriorcingulate cortex Mid cingulate cortexCingulum bundleCorpus callosumACCInsulaThalamusPFCSMAPPCAmygdalaPAGPBM1S1BGPCCHTS2ACCInsulaPFCAmygdalaPAGRVM
Fig. 93.1
 Brain pathways, regions, and networks involved in acute and chronic pain. ACC, Anterior cingulate cortex; PCC, posterior cingulate cor
-
tex; BG, basal ganglia; HT, hypothalamus; PAG, periaqueductal gray; PB, parabrachial nuclei; PFC, prefrontal cortex; PPC, posterior parietal cortex; 
SMA, supplementary motor area; RVM, rostral ventromedial medulla. 
(
A,
 left panel from Apkarian AV, Bushnell MC, Treede RD, Zubieta JK. Human 
brain mechanisms of pain perception and regulation in health and disease. Eur J Pain. 2005;9:463–484; 
A,
 right panel from Schweinhardt P, Bushnell 
MC. Pain imaging in health and disease—how far have we come? J Clin Invest. 2010;120:3788–3797; 
B
 from Davis KD, Flor H, Greely HT, et al. Brain 
imaging tests for chronic pain: Medical, legal and ethical issues and recommendations. Nat Rev Neurol. 2017;13:624–638.)
Table 93.1 
 
  Pain Categories and Characteristics
PAIN CATEGORY
DEFINITION
EXAMPLES
CHARACTERISTICS
Somatic
Pain resulting from injury to or 
inflammation of tissues (e.g., 
skin, muscle, tendons, bone, 
joints, fascia, vasculature)
Burns, lacerations, fractures, 
infections, inflammatory 
conditions
In skin and superficial structures:
 sharp, pulsatile, well 
 
localized
In deep somatic structures:
 dull, aching, pulsatile, not well 
localized
Visceral
Pain resulting from injury to or 
inflammation of viscera
Angina, hepatic distention, 
bowel distention or 
 
hypermobility, pancreatitis
Aching and cramping; nonpulsatile; poorly localized (e.g., 
appendiceal pain perceived around umbilicus) or referred 
to distant locations (e.g., angina perceived in shoulder)
Neuropathic
Pain resulting from injury 
 
to, inflammation of, or 
 
dysfunction of the peripheral 
or central nervous system
Complex regional pain 
 
syndrome (CRPS), 
 
phantom limb pain, 
Guillain- Barré syndrome, 
sciatica
Spontaneous; burning; lancinating or shooting; dysesthesias 
 
(pins and needles, electrical sensations); 
hyperalgesia
 
(amplification of noxious stimuli); 
hyperpathia
 (widespread 
pain in response to a discrete noxious stimulus); 
allodynia
 
(pain in response to nonpainful stimulation); pain may be 
perceived distal or proximal to site of injury, often 
 
corresponding to innervation pathways (e.g., sciatica)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
679
Behavioral IndicatorsFacial grimacing:
 The Neonatal Facial Coding System uses several 
facial actions that may be indicators of pain. Pain is characterized by a bulging brow with tight creases in between; tightly closed eyelids; a 
deeply furrowed nasolabial groove; a horizontal, wide opened mouth;
and a taut tongue that may be quivering along with the chin. Crying:
 May be an indicator of pain.
Activity:
 Withdrawal or immobilization of a limb may be an indicator of 
pain. Response to comfort measures:
 Feeding, swaddling, holding, and 
ensuring that the infant is neither wet nor cold may help to discriminate between pain and other conditions.Physiologic indicators:
 Alterations in heart rate, blood pressure, SpO2, 
respiratory rate, or alterations in pattern of respiration may be
 
nonspecific indicators of pain. Self-Report of Pain
Categorical description: Toddlers or young children are asked to say if they are having "a little bit," a "middle amount," or "a lot" of pain.Faces Scales: Children who do not have an appreciation of ordinal numbering are asked to rate their pain based upon cartoons depicting facial indicators of distress
.
Numerical Rating Scale (NRS): Older children and teenagers are asked to rate theirpain on a scale of "0" (no pain) to "10" (worst pain).Visual Analog Scale (VAS): Children or teenagers are asked to move an indicator alon
g
a mechanical slide to depict the level of pain; the clinician reads a number along a
10-cm indicator on the back to determine the numeric score.
0246
81
0
Fig. 93.2
 Clinically useful pain assessment tools. 
(Adapted from Burg FD, Ingelfinger JR, Polin RA, et al., eds. Current Pediatric Therapy, 18th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006:16; and Hicks CL, von Baeyer CL, Spafford P, et al. The Faces Pain Scale—revised: Toward a common metric in pediatric 
pain measurement. Pain. 2001;93:173–183.)
Table 93.2 
 
  Pain Measurement Tools
NAME
FEATURES
AGE RANGE
ADVANTAGES
VALIDATION AND 
USES
LIMITATIONS
Visual Analog Scale 
(VAS)
Horizontal 10- cm line; 
subject marks a spot 
on the line between 
anchors of “no 
pain” and “most 
pain imaginable”
6- 8 yr and older
Good psychometric 
properties; 
 
validated for 
 
research purposes
Acute pain
Surgical pain
Chronic pain
Cannot be used in younger 
children or in those with 
cognitive limitations
Requires language skills 
and numerical processing; 
upper anchor of “most 
pain” requires an 
experiential reference 
point that is lacking in 
many children
Numerical Rating 
Scale (NRS)
Integers from 0 
to 10, inclusive, 
corresponding to a 
range from no pain 
to most pain
6- 8 yr and older
Good psychometric 
properties; 
validated for 
research purposes
Acute pain
Surgical pain
Chronic pain
Same as for VAS
Faces Scales (e.g., 
FACES- R, Wong- 
Baker, Oucher, Bieri, 
McGrath scales)
Subjects rate their 
pain by identifying 
with line drawings of 
faces or photos of 
children
3 yr and older
Can be used at 
younger ages than 
VAS and NRS
Acute pain
Surgical pain
Choice of “no pain” face 
affects responses (neutral 
vs smiling); not culturally 
universal
Behavioral or 
combined 
behavioral- 
physiologic scales 
(e.g., FLACC, 
N- PASS, CHEOPS, 
OPS, FACS, NIPS)
Scoring of observed 
behaviors (e.g., 
facial expression, 
limb movement) 
± heart rate and 
blood pressure
Some work for 
any ages; some 
work for specific 
age- groups, 
including 
preterm infants
May be used in 
both infants and 
nonverbal children
FLACC, N- PASS:
Acute pain
Surgical pain
Nonspecific; overrates pain 
in toddlers and preschool 
children; underrates 
persistent pain; some 
measures are convenient, 
but others require 
videotaping and complex 
processing; vital sign 
changes unrelated to pain 
can occur and may affect 
total score
Autonomic measures 
(e.g., heart rate, 
blood pressure, 
heart rate spectral 
analyses)
Scores changes in 
heart rate, blood 
pressure, or 
measures of heart 
rate variability (e.g., 
“vagal tone”)
All ages
Can be used at all 
ages; useful for 
patients receiving 
mechanical 
ventilation
Nonspecific; vital sign 
changes unrelated to 
pain may occur and may 
artifactually increase or 
decrease score
Hormonal- metabolic 
measures
Plasma or salivary 
sampling of 
“stress” hormones 
(e.g., cortisol, 
epinephrine)
All ages
Can be used at all 
ages
Nonspecific; changes 
 
unrelated to pain can 
occur; inconvenient; cannot 
provide “real- time” 
 
information; standard 
normal values not available 
for every age bracket
VAS, visual analog scale; NRS, numerical rating scale; FLACC, face, legs activity, cry, and consolability pain scale for preverbal/nonverbal patients; N-PASS, neonatal pain agitation 
and sedation scale.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

680 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
The Newborn and Infant
There are several behavioral distress scales for the infant and young child, 
mostly emphasizing the patient’s facial expressions, crying, and body 
movement. Facial expression measures appear most useful and specific 
in neonates. Autonomic and vital signs can indicate pain, but because 
they are nonspecific, they may reflect other processes, including fever, 
hypoxemia, and cardiac or renal dysfunction (
Tables	93.3	and	93.4
).
 
The Older Child
Children age 3- 7 years old become increasingly articulate in describ
-
ing the intensity, location, and quality of pain. Pain is occasionally 
referred to adjacent areas; referral of hip pain to the thigh or area 
above the knee is common in this age range. Self- report measures for 
children this age include using drawings, pictures of faces, or graded 
color intensities. Children 
≥
8 years old can usually use verbal numer
-
ical rating scales (NRS) or visual analog pain scales (VAS) accurately 
(see 
Fig. 93.2
). Verbal numerical ratings are preferred and considered 
the gold standard: valid and reliable ratings can be obtained from 
children 
≥
8 years of age. The NRS consists of numbers from 0 to 10, 
in which 0 represents no pain and 10 represents very severe pain. 
There is debate about the label for the highest pain rating, but the cur
-
rent agreement is 
not
 to use the phrase “worst pain possible,” because 
children can always imagine a greater pain. In the United States, 
regularly documented pain assessments are required for hospitalized 
children and children attending outpatient hospital clinics and emer
-
gency departments. Pain scores do not always correlate with changes 
in heart rate or blood pressure.
 
The Cognitively Impaired Child
Measuring pain in cognitively impaired children remains a challenge. 
Understanding pain expression and experience in this population is 
important because behaviors may be misinterpreted as indicating that 
cognitively impaired children are more insensitive to pain than neuro
-
typical children. Children with trisomy 21 may express pain less pre
-
cisely and more slowly than the general population. Pain in children 
with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) may be difficult to assess because 
these children may be both 
hyposensitive
 and 
hypersensitive
 to many 
different types of sensory stimuli, and they may have limited commu
-
nication abilities. Although self- reports of pain can be elicited from 
some children who are cognitively impaired, observational measures 
have better validation among these children. The 
Noncommunicat
-
ing Child’s Pain Checklist—Postoperative Version
 is recommended 
for children up to 18 years old. In addition, the FLACC pain scale has 
been validated in nonverbal and cognitively impaired children (
Table	
93.5
). Maladaptive behaviors and reduction in function may also indi
-
cate pain. Children with severe cognitive impairments experience pain 
frequently, and children with the fewest abilities experience the most 
pain. For this reason, providers must be able to recognize subtle signs 
and symptoms of pain (see 
Table	93.3
)
 
Table 93.4 
 
  CRIES Neonatal Pain Assessment Scale
0
1
2
C
rying
No
High pitched 
but consolable
Inconsolable
R
equires oxygen for 
saturation	>95%
No
FiO
2
	<30%
FiO
2
	>30%

ncreased vital signs
No
HR	or	BP	<20%
HR	or	BP	>20%

xpression
No
Grimace
Grimace and grunt
S
leepless
No
Wakes often
Constantly awake
Score	<4	initiate	nonpharmacologic	measures
Score	>4	initiate	pharmacologic	and	nonpharmacologic	measures
BP, Blood pressure; HR, heart rate.
From Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. 
Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children,
 10th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, 
Table 23.2
, p. 487.
Table 93.5 
 
  Revised FLACC for Pain Assessment in the Cognitively Impaired
*
0
1
2
F
ace
No particular expression or 
smile
Occasional grimace/frown; withdrawn or 
disinterested (appears sad or worried)
Consistent grimace or frown; frequent/constant 
quivering chin, clenched jaw (distressed- 
looking face; expression of fright or panic)
L
egs
Normal position or relaxed
Uneasy, restless, tense (occasional 
 
tremors)
Kicking or legs drawn up (marked increase in 
spasticity, constant tremors, or jerking)
A
ctivity
Lying quietly, normal position, 
moves easily
Squirming, shifting back and forth, tense 
(mildly agitated [e.g., head back and 
forth, aggression]; shallow, splinting 
respirations, intermittent sighs)
Arched, rigid, or jerking (severe agitation, head 
banging; shivering [not rigors]; breath- holding, 
gasping or sharp intake of breath; severe 
splinting)
C
ry
No cry (awake or asleep)
Moans or whimpers, occasional complaint 
(occasional verbal outburst or grunt)
Crying steadily, screams or sobs, frequent 
complaints (repeated outbursts, constant 
grunting)
C
onsolability
Content, relaxed
Reassured by occasional touching, 
hugging, or talking; distractible
Difficult to console or comfort (pushing away 
caregiver, resisting care or comfort measures)
*Revised descriptors for children with disabilities shown in brackets.
0= Relaxed/comfortable
1–3 = Mild discomfort
4–6 = Moderate pain
7–10 = Severe pain
FLACC Scoring System: May be used in preverbal, mechanically ventilated, or cognitively impaired patients; it is an acronym that includes 5 indicators, each scored as a 0, 1, or 2, that 
form a 10- point composite scale with a range from 0 (no pain) to 10 (worst pain). FLACC: Score each category between 0 and 2. The total score may be any number from 0 to 10.
From Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. 
Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children,
 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, 
Table 23.3
, p. 488.
Table 93.3 
 
  Signs and Symptoms of Pain in Infants and 
Young Children
PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES
	•		Increase	in	heart	rate,	
 
respiratory rate, blood 
 
pressure, muscle tone
	•		Oxygen	desaturation
	•		Sweating
	•		Flushing
	•		Pallor
c]bN
	•		Change	in	facial	expression	
(grimacing, furrowing of the 
brow, nasal flaring, deep 
nasolabial groove, curving of 
the tongue, quivering of the 
chin)
	•		Finger	clenching
	•		Thrashing	of	limbs
	•		Writhing
	•		Back	arching
	•		Head	banging
	•		Poor	feeding
	•		Sleep	disturbance
	•		Pseudoparalysis
From Krauss BS, Calligaris L, Green SM, Barbi E. Current concepts in management of 
pain in children in the emergency department. 
Lancet
. 2016;387:83–92.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
681
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR TREATMENT OF 
PEDIATRIC PAIN
Many models of pain focus on factors that explain the interindivid
-
ual variability in pain perception and the chronicity and impairment 
experienced with pain. Central to these models are interrelationships 
among biologic, cognitive, affective, and social factors that influence 
children’s pain and disability, commonly referred to as 
biopsychosocial 
models
 of pain. 
Biologic
 factors include the child’s physical health, cen
-
tral nervous system (CNS) factors (pain processing), gender, pubertal 
status, and genetic factors. Individual child 
cognitive and affective
 fac
-
tors related to perception of pain include anxiety, fear, negative affect, 
pain behaviors, and functional disability, whereas 
social
 factors include 
such areas as culture, socioeconomic status, school environment, social 
and peer interactions, adverse childhood events, and parental and fam
-
ily factors. For children, 
developmental
 factors need to be considered, 
such as cognitive and motor development, birth history, and epigenetic 
factors (the interaction in development between genetic and environ
-
mental factors).
A framework that considers the interplay of biologic, psychologic, 
and social factors is useful for understanding pediatric pain and to 
guide pain assessment and the delivery of pain prevention and man
-
agement. Many simple interventions designed to promote relaxation 
and patient control can work either alone or synergistically with pain 
medications for relief of pain and related distress. Moreover, psycho
-
logic interventions are often coupled with physical therapy interven
-
tions to assist in the management of disabling chronic pain.
Pharmacologic Treatment of Pain
The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of analgesics vary with 
age. This results in drug responses in infants and young children that 
differ from those in older children and adults. The elimination half- life 
of most analgesics is prolonged in neonates and young infants because 
of their immature hepatic enzyme systems and reduced glomeru
-
lar filtration. Clearance of analgesics may also be variable in young 
infants and children. Renal blood flow, glomerular filtration, and tubu
-
lar secretion increase dramatically in the first few weeks after birth, 
approaching adult values by 3- 5 months of age. Renal clearance of anal
-
gesics is often greater in toddlers and preschool- age children than in 
adults, whereas in premature infants, clearance is reduced. Age- related 
differences	in	body	composition	and	protein	binding	also	exist.	Total	
body water as a fraction of body weight is greater in neonates than in 
children	or	adults.	Tissues	with	high	perfusion,	such	as	the	brain	and	
heart, account for a larger proportion of body mass in neonates than 
do other tissues, such as muscle and fat. Because of decreased serum 
concentrations of albumin and 
α
1
- acid glycoprotein, neonates have 
reduced protein binding of some drugs, resulting in higher amounts of 
free, unbound, pharmacologically active drugs.
Acetaminophen, Aspirin, and Nonsteroidal 
 
Antiinflammatory Drugs
Acetaminophen and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 
have replaced aspirin as the most used antipyretics and oral, nonopioid 
analgesics (
Table	93.6
). This is because of the association of Reye syn
-
drome with the use of aspirin in children with a viral infection, such as 
influenza or chickenpox.
Acetaminophen
, a generally safe, nonopioid analgesic and anti
-
pyretic, has the advantage of intravenous (IV), rectal, and oral routes 
of administration. Acetaminophen is not associated with the gastro
-
intestinal (GI) or antiplatelet effects of aspirin and NSAIDs, making 
it a particularly useful drug in patients with cancer. Unlike aspirin 
and NSAIDs, acetaminophen has only mild antiinflammatory action. 
Although acetaminophen alone may not adequately treat various types 
of pain, in conjunction with other agents, it can lead to improved pain 
control and decreased opioid use. One effective management strategy 
can be to schedule acetaminophen and/or NSAIDs to decrease the 
need for opioids, while still maintaining good pain control.
Acetaminophen toxicity can result from a large single dose or cumu
-
lative excessive dosing over days or weeks (see 
Chapter 94
).	Toxicity	
manifests as fulminant hepatic necrosis and liver failure in infants, 
children, and adults. Drug biotransformation processes are immature 
in neonates, very active in young children, and somewhat less active in 
adults. Young children are more resistant to acetaminophen- induced 
hepatotoxicity than are adults as a result of metabolic differences. Sul
-
fation predominates over glucuronidation in young children, leading 
to a reduction in NAPQI 
production.
Aspirin
 is indicated for certain rheumatologic conditions and for 
inhibition of platelet adhesiveness, as in the treatment of Kawasaki 
disease. Concerns about Reye syndrome have resulted in a substan
-
tial decline in pediatric aspirin use. In general, aspirin should not be 
used for routine pain control in children. It is important to be aware of 
able 93.6 
 
  Commonly Used Nonopioid Medications (Antiinflammatory Medications)
MEDICATION
DOSAGE
COMMENT(S)
Acetaminophen
10- 15 mg/kg PO q4h
10 mg/kg IV q4h
15 mg/kg IV q6h
10	mg/kg	IV	q6h	(<2	yr)
20- 30 mg/kg/PR q4h
40 mg/kg/PR q6- 8h
Maximum daily dosing:
75 mg/kg/24 hr (children)
60	mg/kg/24	hr	(<2	yr)
30- 45 mg/kg/24 hr (neonates)
Minimal antiinflammatory action; no antiplatelet or adverse 
gastric effects; overdosing can produce fulminant hepatic 
failure.
Ibuprofen
8- 10 mg/kg PO q6h
10 mg/kg IV q4- 6h to maximum of 400 mg
Maximum daily dose:
 2,400 mg
Antiinflammatory; transient antiplatelet effects; may cause 
gastritis; extensive pediatric safety experience.
Naproxen
5- 7 mg/kg PO q8- 12h
Maximum daily dose:
 1,000 mg
Antiinflammatory; transient antiplatelet effects; may cause 
gastritis; more prolonged duration than that of ibuprofen.
Ketorolac
Loading dose 0.3 mg/kg, then 0.25- 0.3 mg/kg IV q6h 
to a maximum of 5 days; maximum single dose 15 
mg	for	those	<	50	kg	and	30	mg	for	those	
≥
 50 kg
Antiinflammatory; reversible antiplatelet effects; may cause 
gastritis; useful for short- term situations in which oral dosing 
is not feasible.
Diclofenac sodium
2- 3 mg/kg/day divided in 2 or 3 doses
Maximum daily dose:
 150 mg
Antiinflammatory; reversible antiplatelet effects; lower risk of 
gastritis and ulceration compared with other NSAIDs.
Celecoxib
Only approved for children 
≥
2 yr;
≥
10 kg to 
≤
25 kg: 50 mg PO bid
>25	kg:	100	mg	PO	bid
Antiinflammatory; no or minimal antiplatelet or gastric effects; 
cross- reactivity with sulfa allergies.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

682 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
aspirin- containing medications that may be available over the counter 
when treating patients.
NSAIDs
 are used widely to treat pain and fever in children. Most 
currently available NSAIDs are nonselective cyclooxygenase (COX) 
inhibitors, that is, drugs that nonselectively block the activity of both 
COX- 1 (found in gastric mucosa and platelets) and COX- 2 (active 
in inflammatory pathways and cortical renal blood flow regulation) 
enzymes that synthesize prostaglandins. In children with juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis, ibuprofen and aspirin are equally effective, but 
ibuprofen is associated with fewer side effects and better drug adher
-
ence. NSAIDs, used adjunctively in surgical patients, reduce opioid 
requirements (and therefore opioid side effects) by as much as 35–40%. 
Although NSAIDs can be useful postoperatively, they should be used 
as an adjunct to, not as a substitute for, opioids in patients with acute 
moderate to severe pain.
Ketorolac is useful in treating moderate to severe acute pain in 
patients who are unable or unwilling to take oral NSAIDs. Intrave
-
nous diclofenac is also available in other countries. U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) recommendations limit ketorolac to five 
consecutive days of administration. IV ibuprofen (Caldolor) is FDA 
approved for the management of pain and fever in infants and children 
>6 months of age, but is not widely available.
Adverse effects of NSAIDs are uncommon but may be serious when 
they occur, including gastritis with pain and bleeding; decreased renal 
blood flow that may reduce glomerular filtration and enhance sodium 
reabsorption, in some cases leading to tubular necrosis; hepatic dys
-
function and liver failure; inhibition of platelet function; and an 
increased incidence of cardiovascular events in patients predisposed 
to stroke and myocardial infarction. Although the overall incidence of 
bleeding is very low, gastric bleeding is the most common cause of seri
-
ous morbidity related to this class of analgesics. NSAIDs should not be 
used in the child with a bleeding diathesis or at risk for bleeding and 
should be used with caution postsurgically. Use after surgeries such as 
tonsillectomy has been debated, but current postoperative guidelines 
do include the use of NSAIDs. Renal injury from short- term use of 
ibuprofen in euvolemic children is quite rare; the risk is increased by 
hypovolemia or cardiac dysfunction. The safety of both ibuprofen and 
acetaminophen for short- term use is well established (see 
Table	93.6
).
The only 
COX- 2 specific NSAID
 currently available in the United 
States is oral celecoxib, whereas in other countries parenteral parecoxib 
and oral rofecoxib are also available. The coxib drugs are selective 
COX- 2 enzyme inhibitors. Therefore they are effective antiinflamma
-
tory and analgesic molecules that generally do not result in platelet 
inhibition with enhanced bleeding or in gastric inflammation or ulcer
-
ation, findings that may be seen with the nonselective COX inhibitors 
in the NSAID class. COX- 2 selective NSAIDs do inhibit regulation 
of cortical renal blood flow and therefore carry the same risk of renal 
toxicity and acute tubular necrosis, particularly in the setting of low 
cardiac output states or dehydration. Celecoxib is therefore an appro
-
priate primary or adjunctive analgesic to use in children after surgery, 
in children with gastric mucosal pathology, or in oncology patients in 
whom concern for hemostasis contraindicates conventional NSAIDs.
Use of NSAIDs for pain management in children less than 6 months 
is not generally recommended due to immature glomerular filtration. 
However, limited use between 3 and 6 months may be appropriate.
 
Opioids
Opioids are analgesic substances either derived from the opium 
poppy 
(opiates)
 or synthesized to have a similar chemical structure 
and mechanism of action 
(opioids)
. The term “narcotics” (narcotic 
analgesics) should be avoided for these agents, as it connotes crimi
-
nality and lacks pharmacologic descriptive specificity. Opioids are 
administered for moderate and severe pain, such as acute postopera
-
tive pain, pain from trauma, sickle cell crisis pain, and cancer pain. 
Opioids can be administered by the oral, rectal, oral transmucosal, 
transdermal, intranasal, epidural, intrathecal, IV, subcutaneous (SC), 
or intramuscular (IM) route. Regardless of route of administration, 
the site of action is at mu (
μ
) opioid receptors in the peripheral ner
-
vous system, spinal cord, brainstem, and higher CNS centers. Infants 
and young children are sometimes underdosed with opioids because 
of concern about significant respiratory side effects. Opioids’ respira
-
tory depressant effects result from infants’ lower metabolic clearance 
of opioids and higher blood levels with frequent dosing. With proper 
understanding of the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics of 
opioids, children can receive effective relief of pain and suffering with 
a good margin of safety, regardless of pharmacokinetic maturity, age, 
or size (
Tables	93.7-	93.9
).
Opioids act by mimicking the actions of endogenous opioid pep
-
tides, binding to receptors in the brain, brainstem, spinal cord, and to 
a lesser extent in the peripheral nervous system, thus leading to inhibi
-
tion of nociception. Opioids also bind to 
μ
 receptors in the pleasure 
centers of the midbrain, particularly in genetically susceptible indi
-
viduals, a factor responsible for the euphoric effect in some individuals 
and the predilection to psychologic dependence and addictive behav
-
ior. Opioids also have dose- dependent respiratory depressant effects 
when interacting with the 
μ
- opioid receptors in the respiratory centers 
of the brainstem, depressing ventilatory drive and blunting ventilatory 
responses to both hypoxia and hypercarbia. These respiratory depres
-
sant effects are increased with co- administration of other sedating 
drugs, particularly benzodiazepines or barbiturates.
Optimal use of opioids requires proactive and anticipatory manage
-
ment of side effects (see 
Table	93.8
) as well as dose adjustments for renal 
or hepatic disease (
Table	93.10
). Common side effects include sedation, 
constipation,	nausea,	vomiting,	urinary	retention,	and	pruritus.	Toler
-
ance usually develops to the side effect of 
nausea
, which typically sub
-
sides with long- term dosing, but nausea may require treatment with 
antiemetics, such as a phenothiazine, butyrophenones, antihistamines, 
or a serotonin receptor antagonist such as ondansetron or granisetron. 
Pruritus and other complications during patient- controlled analgesia 
with opioids may be effectively managed by low- dose IV naloxone.
The most common troubling, but treatable, side effect is 
consti
-
pation
. Patients who take opioids for chronic pain for long periods 
predictably develop tolerance to the sedative and analgesic effects of 
opioids over time, but tolerance to constipation does not occur, and 
constipation remains a troublesome and distressing problem in almost 
all patients with long- term opioid administration. Stool softeners and 
stimulant laxatives should be administered to most patients receiving 
opioids for more than a few days. Osmotic and bulk laxatives are less 
effective, usually producing more distention and discomfort. A periph
-
erally acting opiate 
μ
- receptor antagonist, 
methylnaltrexone
, promptly 
and effectively reverses opioid- induced constipation in patients with 
chronic pain who are receiving opioids daily. Methylnaltrexone is 
approved for use as either an injectable or oral formulation, but only 
the SC injection is commercially available, which most children will 
object to receiving. Naldemedine and naloxegol are other agents with 
actions similar to methylnaltrexone. 
Lubiprostone
 is a colonic chlo
-
ride channel inhibitor that impairs water reabsorption in the colon and 
is very effective for opioid- induced constipation.
Media and government attention to the “opioid epidemic” has rea
-
sonably led to scrutiny of the prescription of opioids to children, and 
FDA approval of opioid formulations for children has raised alarm and 
criticism by some vocal critics of the use of opioids for medical pur
-
poses. Thus one of the potent barriers to effective management of pain 
with opioids is the fear of addiction held by many prescribing pediatri
-
cians and parents alike. Pediatricians should understand the phenom
-
ena of tolerance, dependence, withdrawal, and addiction (
Table	93.11
). 
Opioid addiction
 is the result of the complex interplay of genetic pre
-
disposition, psychiatric pathology, and social forces, including pov
-
erty, joblessness, hopelessness, and despair. The dramatic increase in 
the amount of opioid abuse and overdoses and opioid- related deaths, 
although highest in the adult non-Hispanic American Indian or Alaska 
Native population age 35–44 years old, has also significantly risen in 
children and adolescents. Among persons 14–18 years, overdose 
deaths increased 114% from 2019 to 2021 with 2,037 (91.3%) of adoles
-
cent overdose deaths in 2021 involving at least one opioid. Despite this 
rise in abuse of opioids, a longitudinal study of children and adoles
-
cents treated for medical reasons with opioids found that there was no 
increased risk of the development of substance abuse, at least until their 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
683
Table 93.7 
 
  Pediatric Dosage Guidelines for Opioid Analgesics
DRUG
EQUI
- ANALGESIC 
DOSES
PARENTERAL DOSING
IV:PO DOSE 
RATIO
ORAL DOSING
COMMENTS
IV
ORAL
<50 
kg
≥
50 
kg
<50 
kg
≥
50 
kg
Fentanyl
10 μg
100 μg
0.5- 1 μg/kg q1- 2h
0.5- 1.5 μg/kg/hr
0.5- 1 μg/kg q1- 2h
0.5- 1.5 μg/kg/hr
Oral 
transmucosal: 
1:10
Transdermal: 1:1
Oral transmucosal: 
10 μg/kg
Transdermal: 12.5- 
50 μg/hr
Transdermal patches 
available; patch 
reaches steady state 
at 24 hr and should 
be changed q72h
70- 100 times as potent as morphine with 
rapid onset and shorter duration.
With high doses and rapid administration, 
can cause chest wall rigidity.
Useful for short procedures; transdermal 
form should be used only in opioid- 
tolerant patients with chronic pain.
Hydrocodone
N/A
1.5 mg
N/A
N/A
N/A
0.15 mg/kg
10 mg
Weak opioid; only available in form with 
acetaminophen.
Hydromor
-
phone
0.2 mg
0.6 mg
0.01 mg q2- 4h
0.002 mg/kg/hr
0.01 mg q2- 4h
0.002 mg/kg/hr
1 : 3
0.04- 0.08 mg/kg 
q3- 4h
2- 4 mg q3- 4h
Five times the potency of morphine; no 
histamine release and fewer adverse 
events than morphine.
Methadone
1 mg
2 mg
0.1 mg/kg q8- 24h
0.1 mg/kg q8- 24h
1:2
0.2 mg/kg q8- 12h 
PO; available as 
liquid or tablet
2.5 mg TID
Duration 12- 24 hr; useful in certain types 
of chronic pain; requires additional 
vigilance because it will accumulate 
over 72 hr and produce delayed 
 
sedation.
When patients tolerant of opioids are 
switched to methadone, they show 
incomplete cross- tolerance and 
 
improved efficacy.
Because methadone is associated with 
prolonged QTc, monitoring is needed 
for children receiving high and 
 
extended dosing.
Morphine
1 mg
3 mg
0.05 mg/kg q2- 4h
0.01- 0.03 mg/
kg/hr
0.1 mg/kg q2- 4h
0.01- 0.03 mg/kg/hr
1:3
Immediate release: 
0.3 mg/kg q3- 4h
Sustained release
:
20- 35 kg: 10- 15 mg 
q8- 12h
35- 50 kg: 15- 30 mg 
q8- 12h
Immediate release: 
15- 20 mg q3- 4h
Sustained release: 30- 
90 mg q8- 12h
Potent opioid for moderate/severe pain; 
may cause histamine release.
Sustained- release form must be 
 
swallowed whole; if crushed, becomes 
immediate acting, leading to acute 
overdose.
Oxycodone
N/A
3 mg
N/A
N/A
N/A
0.1- 0.2 mg q3- 4h; 
available in liquid 
(1 mg/mL)
Immediate release: 
5- 10 mg q4h
Sustained release: 10- 
120 mg q8- 12h
Strong opioid only available as an oral 
agent in North America; more potent 
than and preferable to hydrocodone.
Sustained- release form must be 
 
swallowed whole; if crushed, becomes 
immediate acting, leading to acute 
overdose.
N/A, not available.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

684 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
mid- 20s. Thus the rational short-  or even long- term use of opioids in 
children does not lead to a predilection for or risk of addiction in a 
child not otherwise at risk because of genetic background, economic 
factors, or social milieu.
It is equally important for pediatricians to realize that even patients 
with recognized substance abuse diagnoses are entitled to effective 
analgesic management, which often includes the use of opioids. If legit
-
imate concerns exist about addiction in a patient, safe, effective opioid 
pain management is often best provided by specialists in pain manage
-
ment and addiction medicine. 
Table	93.12
 outlines the U.S. Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) opioid recommendations for 
chronic pain
 (primarily in adults).
There is no longer a reason to administer opioids by IM injection. 
Continuous IV infusion of opioids is an effective option that permits 
more constant plasma concentrations and clinical effects than inter
-
mittent IV bolus dosing without the pain associated with IM injection. 
The most common approach in pediatric centers is to administer a low- 
dose basal opioid infusion while permitting patients to use a 
patient- 
controlled analgesia (PCA)
 device to titrate the dosage above the 
infusion (
Fig. 93.3
) (see 
Chapter 91
). Compared with children given 
intermittent IM morphine, children using PCA reported better pain 
scores. PCA has several other advantages: (1) dosing can be adjusted to 
account for individual pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic varia
-
tion and for changing pain intensity during the day; (2) psychologically 
the patient is more in control, actively coping with the pain; (3) over
-
all opioid consumption tends to be lower; (4) fewer opioid side effects 
occur; and (5) patient satisfaction is generally much higher. Children 
as young as 5- 6 years old can effectively use PCA. The device can also 
Table 93.8 
 
  Management of Opioid- Induced Adverse Effects
Respiratory depression
Naloxone
:
 0.01- 0.02 mg/kg up to a full reversal dose of 0.1 mg/kg. May be given IV, IM, IN, SC, or via ETT.
The full reversal dose should initially be used for apnea in opioid- naive patients. In opioid- tolerant patients, a 
reduced dose should be given and titrated up slowly to treat symptoms but prevent acute withdrawal.
Ventilation may need to be supported during this process.
Dose may be repeated every 2 min to a total of 10 mg.
Adult maximum dose is 2 mg/dose. Give with caution to patients who are receiving long- term opioid therapy, as it 
may precipitate acute withdrawal.
Duration of effect is 1- 4 hr; therefore close observation for recurrent symptoms is essential.
Excessive sedation without 
evidence of respiratory 
depression
Change opioid or decrease the dose. In palliative patients or other special circumstances, can consider treating 
with stimulants.
Methylphenidate
*
:
 0.3 mg/kg per dose PO (typically 10- 20 mg/dose to a teenager) before breakfast and lunch. Do 
not administer to patients receiving clonidine, because dysrhythmias may develop.
Dextroamphetamine
: 2.5- 10 mg on awakening and at noon. Not for use in young children or in patients with 
 
cardiovascular disease or hypertension.
Modafinil:
 Pediatric dose not established. May be useful in selected patients. Typical adult dose: 50- 200 mg/day.
Nausea and vomiting
Metoclopramide
†
:
 0.15 mg/kg IV up to 10 mg/dose q6- 12h for 24 hr.
Trimethobenzamide:
	if	weight	<15	kg,	100	mg	PO	or	PR	q6h;	if	>15	kg,	200	mg	PO	or	PR	q6h.	(
Note:
 Suppository 
contains benzocaine 2%.) Not for use in newborn infants or premature infants.
5- HT
3
 receptor blockers:
Ondansetron:
 0.15 mg/kg up to 8 mg IV q6- 8h not to exceed 32 mg/day (also available as a sublingual tablet).
Granisetron:
 10 to 20 μg/kg IV q12- 24h.
Prochlorperazine
*
‡
	(Compazine):	>2	yr	or	>20	kg,	0.1	mg/kg	per	dose	q8h	IM	or	PO	up	to	10	mg/dose.
Change opioid.
Pruritus
Hydroxyzine
: 0.5 mg/kg PO q6h.
Nalbuphine:
 0.1 mg/kg IV q6h for pruritus caused by intraaxial opioids, especially fentanyl. Administer slowly over 
15- 20 min. May cause acute reversal of systemic μ- receptor effects and leave 
κ
- agonism intact.
Naloxone:
 0.5- 2 mcg/kg/hr IV infusion (titrate up to decrease pruritus and reduce infusion if pain increases).
Ondansetron:
 0.05- 0.1 mg/kg IV or PO q8h.
Cyproheptadine
†
:
 0.1- 0.2 mg/kg PO q8- 12h. Maximum dose 12 mg.
Change opioid.
Constipation
Encourage water consumption, high- fiber diet, and vegetable fiber.
Bulk laxatives:
 Metamucil, Maltsupex.
Lubricants:
 Mineral oil 15- 30 mL PO daily as needed (not for use in infants because of aspiration risk).
Surfactants:
 Sodium docusate (Colace):
<3	yr:	10	mg	PO	q8h
3- 6 yr: 15 mg PO q8h
6- 12 yr: 50 mg PO q8h
>12	yr:	100	mg	PO	q8h
Stimulants:
Bisacodyl suppository (Dulcolax):
<2	yr:	5	mg	PR	qhs
>2	yr:	10	mg	PR	qhs
Senna syrup
	(218	mg/5	mL):	>3	yr:	5	mL	qhs
Enema:
 Fleet hypertonic phosphate enema (older children; risk of hyperphosphatemia).
Electrolytic/osmotic:
 Milk of magnesia; for severe impaction: polyethylene glycol (GoLYTELY, MiraLAX).
Methylnaltrexone is an opioid antagonist that works in the colon and does not cross the blood- brain barrier to 
reverse analgesia; given as subcutaneous injection every day or every other day (0.15 mg/kg) and is effective in 
producing stool in 30- 60 min in most patients.
Urinary retention
Straight catheterization, indwelling catheter.
Decrease opioids, use naloxone drip.
*Avoid in patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
†
May be associated with extrapyramidal side effects, which may be more often seen in children than in adults.
‡
Consider pretreatment with diphenydramine to decrease risk of anti-dopaminergic adverse events (e.g., dystonia).
ETT, Endotracheal tube; IV, intravenously; IM, intramuscularly; IN, intranasally; PO, orally; PR, rectally; SC, subcutaneously.
Modified from Burg FD, Ingelfinger JR, Polin RA, et al., eds. 
Current Pediatric Therapy,
 18th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006, p 16.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
685
be activated by parents or nurses, known as 
PCA- by- proxy (PCA- P) 
or parent- nurse controlled analgesia (PNCA)
, which produces anal
-
gesia in a safe, effective manner for children who cannot activate the 
PCA demand button themselves because they are too young or intel
-
lectually or physically impaired. PCA overdoses have occurred when 
well- meaning, inadequately instructed parents pushed the PCA button 
in medically complicated situations, with or without the use of PCA- P, 
highlighting the need for patient and family education, use of proto
-
cols, physiologic monitoring, and adequate nursing supervision.
Because of the high risk of adverse side effects (respiratory depres
-
sion), the FDA has issued 
contraindications
 for the pediatric use of 
codeine and tramadol (
Table	93.13
).
 
 
Local anesthetics are widely used in children for topical application, 
cutaneous infiltration, peripheral nerve block, neuraxial blocks (intra
-
thecal or epidural infusions), and IV infusions (see 
Chapter 91
). Local 
anesthetics can be used with excellent safety and effectiveness. Local 
anesthetics interfere with neural transmission by blocking neuronal 
sodium channels. Excessive systemic dosing can cause seizures, CNS 
depression, and (by cardiac and arteriolar sodium channel blockade) 
hypotension, arrhythmias, cardiac depression, and cardiovascular col
-
lapse. Local anesthetics therefore require a strict maximum dosing 
schedule. Pediatricians should be aware of the need to calculate these 
doses and adhere to guidelines.
Topical	local	anesthetic	preparations	do	not	generally	result	in	
measurable systemic blood levels and can reduce pain in diverse 
circumstances: suturing of lacerations, placement of peripheral IV 
catheters, lumbar punctures, and accessing indwelling central venous 
ports (
Table	93.14
). The application of tetracaine, epinephrine 
(adrenaline),	and	cocaine	(TAC)	results	in	good	anesthesia	for	sutur
-
ing wounds but should not be used on mucous membranes or the 
hypervascular faces of young children. An alternative combination 
of	lidocaine,	epinephrine,	and	tetracaine	(LET)	is	preferred	to	avoid	
the psychomimetic properties of cocaine. EMLA, a topical eutectic 
mixture of lidocaine and prilocaine used to anesthetize intact skin, 
is frequently applied for venipuncture, lumbar puncture, and other 
needle procedures. A 5% liposomal lidocaine cream (LMX4) is also 
effective as a topical anesthetic. Another unique device is the needle- 
free J- tip, which uses a CO
2
 cartridge to deliver lidocaine into the 
subcutaneous tissue via a micro- atomizing tip. This can be used to 
able 93.9 
 
  Equianalgesic Doses and Half- Life (T
1/2
β
) of 
Some Commonly Used Opioids
OPIOID
IM/
IV DOSE 
(
mg
)
ORAL DOSE 
(
mg
)
T
1/2
β
 (
hr
)
Morphine
10
30
2- 3
Oxycodone
15
20- 30
2- 3
Fentanyl
0.15- 0.2
—
3- 5
Alfentanil
0.75- 1.5
—
1- 2
Sufentanil
0.02
—
2- 3
Methadone
10
10- 15
15- 40
Hydromorphone
1.5
7.5
3- 4
Tramadol
†
100
100
5- 7
Buprenorphine
0.4
0.8 (sublingual)
3- 5
Pentazocine
60
150
3- 5
Nalbuphine
10- 20
—
2- 4
Butorphanol
2
—
2- 3
†
Only part of its analgesic action results from action on μ- opioid receptors.
NOTES:
•	Published	reports	vary	in	the	suggested	doses	considered	to	be	equianalgesic	to	
morphine. Therefore titration to clinical response in each patient is necessary.
•	Suggested	doses	are	the	results	of	single-	dose	studies	only.	Therefore	use	of	the	
data to calculate total daily dose requirements and repeated or continuous doses 
may not be appropriate.
•	There	may	be	incomplete	cross-	tolerance	between	these	drugs.	In	patients	who	have	
been receiving one opioid for a prolonged period, it is usually necessary to use a 
dose lower than the expected equianalgesic dose when changing to another opioid 
and to titrate to effect.
Modified from Macintyre PE, Ready LB. 
Acute Pain Management: A Practical Guide,
 
2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001, p 19.
Table 93.10 
 
  Opioid Use Guidelines in Hepatic and Renal Dysfunction
DRUG
PKA
PROTEIN 
BINDING (%)
PHASE 1 
 
METABOLISM
PHASE 2 
 
METABOLISM
ACTIVE 
 
METABOLITE
BILIARY 
 
EXCRETION
1
 
 
(%)
RENAL 
 
EXCRETION
2
USE IN 
RENAL 
 
FAILURE
Morphine
8.0
30
None
Glucuronidation
M6G
10
Metabolites
Use with 
caution
a
,
c
Fentanyl
8.4
80
CYP3A4
None
None
Norfentanyl
Preferred
b
,
e
Hydromorphone
8.2
20
None
Glucuronidation
H6G
H3G & H6G
Use with 
caution
a
,
d
Methadone
8.3
90
CYP2B6
CYP3A4, 
CYP2D6
None
None
20- 40
Metabolites
Use with 
caution
b
,
e
Codeine
8.2
25
CYP2D6
None
Morphine, 
Hydrocodone 
M6G
M6G
No
b
,
d
Oxycodone
8.5
45
CYP3A4, 
CYP2D6
None
Oxymorphone
Noroxycodone
Use with 
caution
f
Oxymorphone
8.2
10
CYP3A4
Glucuronidation
None
Noroxymorphone
Use with 
caution
a
,
c
Remifentanil
7.1
70
Esterase
None
None
Metabolite
1
In the setting of hepatic dysfunction, all opioids should be used cautiously (“go low, go slow”). Meperidine (inactive metabolite associated with seizures) and codeine (cannot be 
metabolized into active metabolite, morphine) should not be used. Fentanyl may be the best opioid to use (in severe liver dysfunction, plasma cholinesterase may not be available 
to metabolize remifentanil).
2
In the setting of renal failure, metabolites of morphine, codeine, hydromorphone, hydrocodone, and meperidine can accumulate, producing increased therapeutic and adverse effects.
a
Parent drug removed by dialysis; 
b
Parent drug not/poorly dialyzed; 
c
Metabolites removed by dialysis; 
d
Metabolites not/poorly dialyzed; 
e
Metabolites inactive;
From Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. 
Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children,
 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, 
Table 23.6
, p. 496.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

686 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
start IVs or provide superficial analgesia before a procedure (e.g., 
lumbar puncture).
Lidocaine
 is the most commonly used local anesthetic for cutane
-
ous infiltration. Maximum safe doses of lidocaine are 5 mg/kg without 
epinephrine and 7 mg/kg with epinephrine
. Although concentrated 
solutions (2%) are commonly available from hospital pharmacies, 
more dilute solutions (0.25% and 0.5%) are equally as effective as 1–2% 
solutions. The diluted solutions cause less burning discomfort on injec
-
tion and permit use of larger volumes without achieving toxic doses. 
In the surgical setting, cutaneous infiltration is more often performed 
with bupivacaine 0.25% or ropivacaine 0.2% because of the much lon
-
ger duration of effect; maximum dosage of these long- acting amide 
anesthetics is 2- 3 mg/kg and 3- 4 mg/kg, respectively. Liposomal bupi
-
vacaine injectable suspension (Exparel) is approved for children age 6 
years old and above. It is an excellent choice for surgical wound infiltra
-
tion. The maximum dose for children is 4 mg/kg.
Neuropathic pain
 may respond well to the local application of a 5% 
lidocaine topical patch (Lidoderm) for 12 hours/day (see 
Table	93.14
), 
although access to lidocaine topical patches may be limited by insur
-
ance coverage. Over- the- counter 4% lidocaine patches are available 
without prescription. Peripheral and central neuropathic pain also 
may respond to IV lidocaine infusions, which may be used in hospital 
settings for refractory pain, complex regional pain syndromes, and pain 
associated with malignancies or the therapy of malignancies, such as 
oral mucositis after bone marrow transplantation. In these patients, 1- 2 
mg/kg/hr 
should be administered and the infusion titrated to achieve 
a blood lidocaine level in the 2- 5 
μ
g/mL range, with use of twice- daily 
therapeutic blood monitoring.
 
UNCONVENTIONAL MEDICATIONS IN 
 
PEDIATRIC PAIN
Unconventional analgesic medication
 refers to a wide number of drugs 
developed for other indications but found to have analgesic properties. 
These drugs have been used for acute and chronic pain and include 
antidepressants, antiepileptic drugs, and neurotropic drugs (
Tables	
93.15 and 93.16
).
The unconventional analgesics are generally used to manage neu
-
ropathic pain conditions, migraine disorders, fibromyalgia syndrome, 
and some forms of functional chronic abdominal pain syndromes. 
These agents also are used as components of multimodal analgesia in 
the management of surgical, somatic, and musculoskeletal pain. 
Figure 
93.4
 presents a decision- making tree to help the physician select the 
appropriate analgesic category for various types of pain.
Although several unconventional pain medications are FDA 
approved for analgesic use, most are not approved for use in youth with 
acute or chronic pain. Thus these drugs should be used with caution, 
with a focus on mitigating pain to allow a child to participate effectively 
in therapies and return to normal activity as soon as possible. The use 
of psychotropic medications should be guided by the principles applied 
to	pharmacologic	treatment	of	any	symptom	or	disease.	Target	symp
-
toms	should	be	identified	and	medication	side	effects	monitored.	To	
determine dosing regimens, the physician should consider the child’s 
weight and the effects that the medical condition and other medica
-
tions, such as psychotropic drugs, may have on the child’s metabolism. 
Therapeutic blood level monitoring can be considered. Side effects 
should be addressed in detail with both parent and child and specific 
instructions given for responding to possible adverse events. Directly 
addressing concerns about addiction, dependence, and tolerance may 
be necessary to decrease treatment- related anxiety and improve medi
-
cation adherence.
Antidepressant Medications
Antidepressants are useful in adults with chronic pain, including neu
-
ropathic pain, headaches, and rheumatoid arthritis, independent of 
their effects on depressive disorders. Antidepressants’ analgesic mech
-
anism of action is inhibition of norepinephrine reuptake in the CNS. 
In children, because clinical trials have been limited, the practitioner 
should use antidepressants cautiously to treat chronic pain or asso
-
ciated depressive or anxiety symptoms. The FDA has issued a “black 
box warning” to inform the public of a small but significant increase 
in suicidal thoughts and attempts in children and adolescents receiv
-
ing antidepressants. A meta- analysis of studies involving children and 
adolescents receiving antidepressants for pain indicated that no sui
-
cides had been completed. The pediatrician should address this issue 
with parents of patients being treated with antidepressants and should 
develop monitoring plans consistent with current FDA recommenda
-
tions (see 
Table	93.16
).
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
 have been studied in children 
with chronic pain and found to be effective in pain relief for symp
-
toms that include neuropathic pain, functional abdominal pain, and 
migraine.	TCA	efficacy	may	be	based	on	inhibition	of	the	neurochemi
-
cal pathways involved in norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake and 
interference with other neurochemicals involved in the perception 
or neural conduction of pain. Because sedation is a common side 
effect,	TCAs	may	also	be	effective	in	treating	the	sleep	disorders	that	
frequently	accompany	pediatric	pain.	Biotransformation	of	TCAs	is	
extensive	in	healthy	children.	Typically,	TCAs	are	administered	only	
at bedtime, especially the more sedating tricyclic medications such as 
amitriptyline. Alternatively, the patient can be started on a bedtime 
dose	of	a	TCA,	which	may	be	able	to	then	be	titrated	to	a	daily	divided	
dose, with the larger dose given at bedtime. It should be noted that 
pain symptoms usually remit at lower doses than those recommended 
Table 93.11 
 
  Practical Aspects of Prescribing Opioids
	•		Morphine,	hydromorphone,	or	fentanyl	is	regarded	as	first	choice	
for severe pain.
	•		Dosing	should	be	titrated	and	individualized.	There	is	no	“right”	
dose for everyone.
	•		The	right	dose	is	the	dose	that	relieves	pain	with	a	good	margin	
of safety.
	•		Dosing	should	be	more	cautious	in	infants,	in	patients	with	
coexisting diseases that increase risk or impair drug clearance, 
and with concomitant administration of sedatives.
	•		Hydromorphone	is	metabolized	by	CYP2D6	and	fentanyl	by	
CYP3A4 and to some extent 2D6; drugs that compete for 2D6 
enzyme will raise blood levels and increase risk of respiratory 
depression.
	•		Morphine	is	metabolized	by	glucuronidation	to	an	active	
metabolite, morphine- 6- glucuronide, which accumulates and 
causes CNS toxicity in renal impairment.
	•		Anticipate	and	treat	peripheral	side	effects,	including	
constipation, nausea, and itching.
	•		Give	doses	at	sufficient	frequency	to	prevent	the	return	of	severe	
pain before the next dose.
	•		Use	a	drug	delivery	method,	such	as	patient-	controlled	anesthesia	
or continuous infusions, that avoids the need for “prn” decision- 
making.
	•		With	opioid	dosing	for	>1	wk,	taper	gradually	to	avoid	abstinence	
syndrome.
	•		When	converting	between	parenteral	and	oral	opioid	doses,	use	
appropriate potency ratios (see 
Table 93.9
).
	•		
Tolerance
 refers to decreasing drug effect with continued 
administration of a drug. Over time a patient will need higher 
dosing to achieve the same clinical effect; however, tolerance to 
sedation and respiratory depression develop more rapidly than 
tolerance to analgesia. Thus with higher doses, patients do not 
experience oversedation or respiratory depression.
	•		
Dependence
 refers to the need for continued drug dosing 
to prevent abstinence syndrome when a drug is abruptly 
discontinued or its dose reduced. Abstinence syndrome is 
characterized by irritability, agitation, autonomic arousal, nasal 
congestion, piloerection, diarrhea, jitteriness, and yawning; it is 
produced	by	administration	of	potent	opioids	for	>5-	7	days.
	•		
Addiction,
 a psychiatric pathology, refers to psychologic craving, 
compulsive drug- seeking behavior, and drug use despite 
medical harm. Addiction has strong genetic and environmental 
determinants. Opioid therapy will not lead to addiction in 
nonsusceptible individuals, and opioid underdosing does not 
prevent addiction; it may in fact increase drug- seeking behavior 
for relief of pain (e.g., watching the clock), referred to as 
“pseudoaddiction.”
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
687
or required for the treatment of mood disorders. Most children and 
adolescents do not require more than 0.25- 1 mg/kg 
of amitriptyline or 
nortriptyline once daily at bedtime.
Attention should also be paid to hepatic microsomal enzyme metabo
-
lism, because CYP2D6 inhibitors, such as cimetidine and quinidine, can 
increase	levels	of	TCAs.	Anticholinergic	side	effects,	which	are	less	com
-
mon in children than in adults, may remit over time. Constipation, ortho
-
static hypotension, and dental caries from dry mouth should be addressed 
by emphasizing the importance of hydration, good oral hygiene, and regu
-
lar dental visits. Other side effects include weight gain, mild bone mar
-
row suppression, and liver dysfunction. Some practitioners recommend 
monitoring CBC and liver function values at baseline and periodically 
during	therapy.	TCA	blood	levels	can	be	obtained	as	well,	but	the	need	for	
therapeutic blood monitoring should be assessed on an individual basis. 
Reasons for blood level monitoring include concerns for altered metabo
-
lism, adherence, overdose, or sudden change in mental status.
All	TCAs	inhibit	cardiac	conduction	pathways	and	prolong	the	QT	
interval. Sudden cardiac death has been reported in children taking 
TCAs,	principally	desipramine,	probably	related	to	QTc	prolongation.	
There is no general agreement for monitoring the electrophysiologic 
effects of these drugs, but it is prudent to obtain a careful personal 
and family history focusing on cardiac arrhythmias, heart disease, 
and syncope before the initiation of treatment. A baseline electrocar
-
diogram (ECG) should be obtained, with care taken to ensure that 
able 93.12 
 
  CDC Practice Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Pain (2022) Excluding Sickle Cell Anemia, Cancer, Palliative 
Care and End of Life Care
DETERMINING WHETHER OR NOT TO INITIATE OPIOIDS FOR PAIN
All patients with pain should receive treatment that provides the 
greatest benefits relative to risks. (See 
Recommendation 1
 for 
determining whether or not to initiate opioids for acute pain [i.e., 
pain	lasting	<1	month]	and	
Recommendation 2
 for determining 
whether or not to initiate opioids for subacute pain [i.e., pain lasting 
1–3	months]	or	chronic	pain	[i.e.,	pain	lasting	>3	months].)
Recommendation 1
Nonopioid therapies are at least as effective as opioids for many 
common types of acute pain. Clinicians should maximize use of 
nonpharmacologic and nonopioid pharmacologic therapies as 
appropriate for the specific condition and patient and only consider 
opioid therapy for acute pain if benefits are anticipated to outweigh 
risks to the patient. Before prescribing opioid therapy for acute 
pain, clinicians should discuss with patients the realistic benefits and 
known risks of opioid therapy.
Recommendation 2
Nonopioid therapies are preferred for subacute and chronic pain. 
Clinicians should maximize use of nonpharmacologic and nonopioid 
pharmacologic therapies as appropriate for the specific condition 
and patient and only consider initiating opioid therapy if expected 
benefits for pain and function are anticipated to outweigh risks to 
the patient. Before starting opioid therapy for subacute or chronic 
pain, clinicians should discuss with patients the realistic benefits and 
known risks of opioid therapy, should work with patients to establish 
treatment goals for pain and function, and should consider how 
opioid therapy will be discontinued if benefits do not outweigh risks.
SELECTING OPIOIDS AND DETERMINING OPIOIDS DOSAGES
Recommendation 3
When starting opioid therapy for acute, subacute, or chronic pain, 
clinicians should prescribe immediate-release opioids instead of 
extended-release and long-acting (ER/LA) opioids.
Recommendation 4
When opioids are initiated for opioid-naïve patients with acute, subacute, 
or chronic pain, clinicians should prescribe the lowest effective dosage. 
If opioids are continued for subacute or chronic pain, clinicians should 
use caution when prescribing opioids at any dosage, should carefully 
evaluate individual benefits and risks when considering increasing 
dosage, and should avoid increasing dosage above levels likely to yield 
diminishing returns in benefits relative to risks to patients.
Recommendation 5
For patients already receiving opioid therapy, clinicians should carefully 
weigh benefits and risks and exercise care when changing opioid 
dosage. If benefits outweigh the risks of continued opioid therapy, 
clinicians should work closely with patients to optimize nonopioid 
therapies while continuing opioid therapy. If benefits do not 
outweigh risks of continued opioid therapy, clinicians should optimize 
other therapies and work closely with patients to gradually taper to 
lower dosages or, if warranted based on the individual circumstances 
of the patient, appropriately taper and discontinue opioids. Unless 
there are indications of a life-threatening issue such as warning signs 
of impending overdose (e.g., confusion, sedation, or slurred speech), 
opioid therapy should not be discontinued abruptly, and clinicians 
should not rapidly reduce opioid dosages from higher dosages.
DECIDING DURATION OF INITIAL OPIOID PRESCRIPTION AND 
CONDUCTING FOLLOW-UP
Recommendation 6
When opioids are needed for acute pain, clinicians should prescribe 
no greater quantity than needed for the expected duration of pain 
severe enough to require opioids.
Recommendation 7
Clinicians should evaluate benefits and risks with patients within 1–4 
weeks of starting opioid therapy for subacute or chronic pain or of 
dosage escalation. Clinicians should regularly reevaluate benefits 
and risks of continued opioid therapy with patients.
ASSESSING RISK AND ADDRESSING POTENTIAL HARMS OF 
OPIOID USE
Recommendation 8
Before starting and periodically during continuation of opioid 
therapy, clinicians should evaluate risk for opioid-related harms and 
discuss risk with patients. Clinicians should work with patients to 
incorporate into the management plan strategies to mitigate risk, 
including offering naloxone.
Recommendation 9
When prescribing initial opioid therapy for acute, subacute, or 
chronic pain, and periodically during opioid therapy for chronic 
pain, clinicians should review the patient’s history of controlled 
substance prescriptions using state prescription drug monitoring 
program (PDMP) data to determine whether the patient is receiving 
opioid dosages or combinations that put the patient at high risk for 
overdose.
Recommendation 10
When prescribing opioids for subacute or chronic pain, clinicians 
should consider the benefits and risks of toxicology testing to 
assess for prescribed medications as well as other prescribed and 
nonprescribed controlled substances.
Recommendation 11
Clinicians should use particular caution when prescribing opioid 
pain medication and benzodiazepines concurrently and consider 
whether benefits outweigh risks of concurrent prescribing of opioids 
and other central nervous system depressants.
Recommendation 12
Clinicians should offer or arrange treatment with evidence-
based medications to treat patients with opioid use disorder. 
Detoxification on its own, without medications for opioid use 
disorder, is not recommended for opioid use disorder because of 
increased risks for resuming drug use, overdose, and overdose 
death.
From Dowell D, Ragan KR, Jones CM, et al: CDC clinical practice guidelines for prescribing opioids for pain – United States, 2022. 
MMWR
 2022;71(3):1-95.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

688 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
the	QTc	is	<450	msec.	If	the	dose	of	amitriptyline	or	nortriptyline	
is increased beyond 0.5 mg/kg/day, an ECG should be performed 
for	each	dosing	increase.	With	TCAs,	as	with	other	antidepressants,	
physical dependence and a known discontinuation syndrome can 
occur. The 
discontinuation syndrome
 includes agitation, sleep dis
-
turbances, appetite changes, and GI symptoms. These medications 
should be tapered slowly to assist in distinguishing among symptoms 
that indicate rebound, withdrawal, or the need for continuing the 
medication.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
 have minimal effi
-
cacy in the treatment of a variety of pain syndromes in adults. SSRIs 
are very useful when symptoms of depression or anxiety are present 
and cannot be addressed adequately by nonpharmacologic means. 
Escitalopram (Lexapro), fluoxetine (Prozac), and sertraline (Zoloft) 
have been approved by the FDA for use in children and adolescents. 
SSRIs	have	a	significantly	milder	side	effect	profile	than	TCAs	(most	
side effects are transient), and they have no anticholinergic side effects. 
Chief side effects include GI symptoms, headaches, agitation, insom
-
nia, sexual dysfunction, and anxiety. Rarely, hyponatremia, or the 
syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH), 
may occur. Interactions with other medications that have serotonergic 
effects may also occur. When multiple medications with serotonergic 
activity are used in combination, there may be increased likelihood 
that a life- threatening 
serotonin syndrome
 may occur, with associ
-
ated symptoms of myoclonus, hyperreflexia, autonomic instability, 
muscle rigidity, and delirium (see 
Chapter 94
). It is important to note 
that although triptans have serotonergic effects, it is unlikely that 
the combination will lead to serotonin syndrome. This is because it 
is hypothesized that serotonin receptors 2A and 1A are the receptors 
involved in serotonin syndrome, whereas triptans are selective for 
serotonin antagonists 1B and 1D
. There is also a 
discontinuation syn
-
drome
 associated with shorter- acting SSRIs (e.g., paroxetine), which 
includes dizziness, lethargy, paresthesias, irritability, and vivid dreams. 
To	avoid	this,	dosages	of	medications	should	be	tapered	slowly	over	
several weeks.
The 
selective serotonin- norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors 
(SNRIs)
 duloxetine and venlafaxine have demonstrated significant 
efficacy with chronic neuropathic and other pain syndromes because 
they inhibit both serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake, and they 
may directly block associated pain receptors as well. Venlafaxine has 
no pain indication labeling. Duloxetine is FDA approved for managing 
neuropathic pain (specifically, diabetic neuropathy) and fibromyalgia 
Table 93.13 
 
  Summary of FDA Recommendations
	•		Use	of	codeine	to	treat	pain	or	cough	in	children	<12	yr	old	is	
contraindicated.
	•		Use	of	tramadol	to	treat	pain	in	children	<12	yr	old	is	
contraindicated.
	•		Use	of	tramadol	for	treatment	of	pain	after	tonsillectomy	or	
adenoidectomy	in	patients	<18	yr	old	is	contraindicated.	(Codeine	
was already contraindicated in such patients.)
	•		Use	of	codeine	or	tramadol	in	children	12-	18	yr	old	who	are	obese	
or who have an increased risk of serious breathing problems, such 
as those with obstructive sleep apnea or severe lung disease, is 
not recommended.
	•		Use	of	codeine	or	tramadol	in	breastfeeding	women	should	be	
avoided.
From FDA warns against use of codeine and tramadol in children and breastfeeding 
women. 
Med Lett
. 2017;59(1521):86–88.
Table 93.14 
 
  Topical Pharmacologic Management of Acute Pain in Children
DRUG
DOSE
NOTES
INTACT SKIN
Lidocaine 2.5% and prilocaine 2.5% (EMLA 
cream)
<3	mo	old	or	<5	kg:	1	g
3-	12	mo	and	>5	kg:	2	g
1-	6	yr	and	>10	kg:	10	g
7-	12	yr	and	>20	kg:	20	g
60 min is needed to achieve maximum effect; 
cover cream with an occlusive dressing 
(Tegaderm)
Lidocaine, liposomal 5% (LMX4)
1- 20 g as noted earlier
30- 60 min needed to achieve maximum effect; 
cover with an occlusive dressing (Tegaderm)
Lidocaine 70 mg and tetracaine 70 mg (Synera 
patch)
Age 
≥
3 yr: apply patch
20- 30 min needed to achieve maximum effect
Tetracaine 4% (Ametop)
>1	mo	and	<5	yr:	apply	1	tube	of	gel	(1	g)
>5	yr:	apply	up	to	5	tubes	of	gel	(5	g)
30 min before venipuncture
45 min before intravenous cannulation
WOUNDS
Lidocaine, epinephrine, tetracaine (LET) 
solution or gel
*
Age 
≥
1 yr: apply to wound
20 min needed for maximum effect
*Also referred to as ALA on the basis of alternative names for the constituents: adrenaline, lignocaine, amethocaine. These mixtures are locally made by hospital formularies, with a 
common formula being lidocaine 4% plus epinephrine 0.1% plus tetracaine 0.5%. The cocaine- based formulation was historically avoided on wounds of digits, ears, penis, nose, 
mucous membranes, close to the eye, or deep wounds involving bone, cartilage, tendon, or vessels. The lidocaine- based formulation can be used in such settings.
Adapted from Krauss BS, Calligaris L, Green SM, Barbi E. Current concepts in management of pain in children in the emergency department. 
Lancet
. 20166;387:83–92.
Drug concentrationTime (hours)
PainIncrease in pain stimulus04812162024‘Analgesic
corridor’
Increasing
side effects
Fig. 93.3
 Patient- controlled analgesia is more likely to keep blood 
concentrations of opioid within the “analgesic corridor” and allows rap
-
id titration if there is an increase in pain stimulus requiring higher blood 
levels of opioid to maintain the analgesia. 
(From Burg FD, Ingelfinger 
JR, Polin RA, et al., eds. Current Pediatric Therapy,18th ed. Philadel
-
phia: Saunders; 2006:16.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
689
syndrome. It is approved for the treatment of pediatric fibromyalgia 
in adolescents 13- 17 years of age and for the treatment of generalized 
anxiety disorder in children 7- 17. A significant advantage of SNRIs 
over	TCAs	when	used	for	headache	prophylaxis	or	neuropathic	pain	
is that they have therapeutic effects on mood and anxiety at dosages 
effective for pain control.
Because both SSRIs and SNRIs have fewer anticholinergic side effects 
than	TCAs,	adherence	to	them	is	better	than	in	psychiatric	populations	
taking	TCAs.	Side	effects	of	both	types	of	drugs	include	GI	symptoms,	
hyperhidrosis, dizziness, and agitation, but these effects generally wane 
over time. Hypertension and orthostatic hypotension may occur; in 
addition, the patient’s blood pressure should be closely followed, and 
appropriate hydration should be stressed. Note that whereas appetite 
stimulation	and	weight	gain	are	associated	with	all	TCAs,	duloxetine	
is often associated with weight loss, frequently a desirable side effect, 
especially in overweight adolescents.
All	antidepressants,	including	the	TCAs,	SSRIs,	and	SNRIs,	are	
thought to have the potential to increase the risk of suicidal ide
-
ation and the risk of suicide in patients, as noted earlier. The FDA 
states, “All pediatric patients being treated with antidepressants for 
any indication should be observed closely for clinical worsening, 
suicidality, and unusual changes in behavior, especially during the 
initial few months of a course of drug therapy, or at times of dose 
changes, either increases or decreases.” However, the FDA also notes, 
“Although there has been a long- standing concern that antidepres
-
sants may have a role in inducing worsening of depression and the 
emergence of suicidality in certain patients, a causal role for anti
-
depressants in inducing such behaviors has not been established. 
Nevertheless, patients being treated with antidepressants should be 
observed closely for clinical worsening and suicidality, especially 
at the beginning of a course of drug therapy, or at the time of dose 
changes, either increases or decreases.”
 
  
 
  Commonly Used Adjunctive Analgesics
DRUG NAME 
(TRADE NAME)
SUGGESTED STARTING DOSE AND 
DOSING INTERVAL
MAXIMUM DOSE PER
 DAY
ADVANTAGES (INDICATION FOR 
USE)
DISADVANTAGES (SIDE 
 
EFFECTS)
Gabapentin 
 
(Neurontin)
10- 15 mg/kg per day divided bid or tid
Max dose: 50 mg/kg per day (3 g/day)
Adjunct for the management of 
 
pediatric neuropathic pain, epilepsy
Drug reaction with eosinophilia 
and systemic symptoms (DRESS), 
anaphylaxis, somnolence, 
dizziness, peripheral edema, 
emotional lability, respiratory 
depression when combined with 
opioids
Pregabalin (Lyrica)
2.5 mg/kg per day divided bid or tid
Max dose: 600 mg per day
Adjunct for the management of 
 
neuropathic pain associated with 
spinal cord injury, fibromyalgia, and 
epilepsy
Ataxia, blurred vision, visual field 
loss, constipation, drowsiness, 
headaches, peripheral edema, 
weight gain, tremor
Clonidine (Catapres)
5- 25 mcg/kg per day divided every 4- 8 
hours if PO dosing
Max dose: 2.4 mg/day
Used to treat hypertension and 
 
mitigate drug withdrawal symptoms; 
also used as a pain or peripheral 
nerve block additive
Drowsiness, dizziness, fatigue, 
headache, dry mouth, 
 
hypotension
Dexmedetomidine 
(Precedex)
Loading dose: 0.5- 1 mcg/kg
Infusion rate: 0.2- 0.7 mcg/kg per hour 
titrated to effect
Suggested max dose: 2.5 mcg/kg per 
hour
Sedative and analgesic properties; 
intraoperative bolus dose of 1 mcg/
kg decreases postoperative morphine 
consumption and 2 mg/kg decreases 
emergence delirium
Bradycardia, hypotension
Tizanidine (Zanaflex)
Patients	>18	yr:	starting	dose	2	mg	q6-8h
Max single dose: 16 mg
Max daily dose: 36 mg
Antispasmodic agent
Dizziness, drowsiness, bradycardia, 
hypotension, fatigue, 
hallucinations, xerostomia
Diazepam (Valium)
PO: 0.1- 0.8 mg/kg/day
IV: 0.05- 0.3 mg/kg/dose every 4- 8 hr
Max dose: 10 mg
Use lowest needed dose; use lower dose 
when combined with opioids or other 
sedating medications
Antispasmodic, anxiolytic, sedative, 
seizure prophylaxis, promotes sleep
Somnolence, unsteady gait
Cyclobenzaprine 
(Flexeril)
Patients	>15	yr:	5	mg	PO	bid-	tid
Max dose: 10 mg PO tid
Antispasmodic
Blurry vision, dizziness, drowsiness, 
lightheadedness, xerostomia
Ketamine
Loading dose: 0.25- 0.5 mg/kg IV before 
incision
Infusion rate:
0.1- 1 mg/kg per hr intraoperatively
0.05- 0.1 mg/kg per hr postoperatively
Max parenteral dose 3,600 mg/day
Sedation, analgesic adjunct, 
 
especially beneficial for 
 
opioid- tolerant or chronic pain 
patients
Hallucinations, double/blurry 
vision, jerky muscle movements, 
drowsiness, loss of appetite, 
nausea
Lidocaine
Loading dose: 1- 1.5 mg/kg IV
Infusion rate:
1- 2 mg/kg per hr intraoperatively
Max dose: 4.5 mg/kg (not to exceed 300 
mg in 2 hr)
Used during intraabdominal 
 
procedures to prevent severe 
 
postoperative pain
Cardiac arrhythmia, 
 
epilepsy/seizures, renal failure
Modified from Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. 
Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children,
 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, 
Table 23.12
, p. 510.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

690 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Antiepileptic Drugs
Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), such as gabapentin, pregabalin, car
-
bamazepine, and valproic acid, are believed to relieve chronic pain 
by blocking sodium (valproate and the gabapentinoids) or calcium 
(carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine) channels at the cellular neuronal 
level, thereby suppressing spontaneous electrical activity and restor
-
ing the normal threshold to depolarization of hypersensitive noci
-
ceptive neurons, without affecting normal nerve conduction. These 
medications are particularly useful in patients with mood disorders 
who have neuropathic pain. In adults, the FDA has approved carbam
-
azepine for trigeminal neuralgia; valproate for migraine prophylaxis; 
and pregabalin for neuropathic pain complicating diabetes, herpes 
zoster, and for management of fibromyalgia. AEDs generally have GI 
side effects in addition to sedation, anemia, ataxia, rash, and hepato
-
toxicity. The majority are also associated with weight gain. Carbam
-
azepine and oxcarbazepine are also associated with Stevens- Johnson 
syndrome.
Liver function and CBC should be monitored at the start of ther
-
apy and periodically with AEDs. Carbamazepine and valproic acid 
have narrow therapeutic windows and variability in therapeutic blood 
medication levels, in addition to many drug- drug interactions, and 
may cause liver disease and renal impairment. Drug levels should be 
measured with each dose increase and periodically thereafter. Carba
-
mazepine, in particular, causes autoinduction of hepatic microsomal 
enzymes, which can further complicate obtaining a therapeutic medi
-
cation level. Female patients should have pregnancy testing before tak
-
ing valproate, and those who are sexually active must be cautioned to 
use effective contraception, because neural tube defects are associated 
with carbamazepine.
Less toxic AEDs (gabapentin and pregabalin) have supplanted the 
use of valproate and carbamazepine in patients with pain. These agents 
have their own side effect profiles, but they are much less toxic than 
their predecessors and do not require monitoring of liver or bone mar
-
row function or blood levels. Furthermore, they are also far less lethal 
in accidental or deliberate overdose.
Gabapentin is approved for treatment of postherpetic neuralgia and 
is also widely prescribed for other pain disorders. It has demonstrated 
some efficacy in treating children with chronic pain, particularly neu
-
ropathic pain, and is used in treatment of chronic headache disorders, 
complex regional pain syndromes, chemotherapy- induced neuropathy, 
and diabetic neuropathy in both children and adults. Gabapentin has 
a relatively benign side effect profile and no drug interactions. Side 
effects include somnolence, dizziness, and ataxia; children occasion
-
ally demonstrate side effects not reported in adults, such as impulsive 
Table 93.16 
 
  Medications for Pediatric Chronic Pain
MEDICATION
DOSING
COMMENTS
TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Amitriptyline, nortriptyline
For patients 
≥
50 kg: Initial dose 5- 10 mg PO qhs; titrate over 
2- 3 weeks to 25- 50 mg PO qhs
For patients 25- 50 kg: Initial dose 0.1 mg/kg PO qhs. Titrate 
over 2- 3 weeks to max dose of 0.5 mg/kg
Obtain 12- lead ECG for prolonged QT interval
Side effects are related to anticholinergic effects, 
including tachycardia, dry mouth, urinary 
 
retention, and sedation
Use with caution with other antidepressants 
 
because of risk of serotonin syndrome
Concomitant use with CYP2D6 inhibitors may lead 
to increased serum concentration
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN-NOREPINEPHRINE REUPTAKE INHIBITORS
Duloxetine (Cymbalta)
For	patients	>	13	yr:	Dose	30-60	mg	PO	daily;	max	600	mg/day
Review risk of suicidality
ANTICONVULSANTS
Gabapentin (Neurontin)
For patients 
≥
50 kg: Initial dose 100-300 mg PO 1- 2 times 
daily; titrate slowly to max dose of 1,800 mg/day divided 
tid; higher dosing possible in select patients
For	patients	<50	kg:	Initial	dose	2-	5	mg/kg	PO	daily;	titrate	
slowly to max dose of 35 mg/day divided tid; higher 
 
dosing possible in select patients
Side effects include drowsiness, concentration and 
memory impairments, and peripheral edema 
(rare)
Dose adjustment necessary with renal impairment
Pregabalin (Lyrica)
Patients	>12	yr	of	age:	Initial	dose	25-75	mg	PO	1-	2	times	
daily; titrate up to max of 300 mg/day divided bid or tid
Side effects include drowsiness, headaches, peripheral 
edema (rare), and thrombocytopenia (rare)
Titrate all medications according to clinical benefit and side effects; use lowest effective dose.
Antidepressants and anticonvulsants may increase the risk of suicidal thinking and behavior in children, adolescents, and young adults. Monitor 
closely for changes in mood or behavior.
Modified from Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. 
Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children,
 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, 
Table 25.2
, p. 580.
Pain diagnosisNeuropathic painNeuropathic paindiagnosisPainfulneuropathy,CRPSMigraine, CDHSmall fiberneuropathySleepdisturbance?Mood lability?Valproic acidTricyclicantidepressantNerve blockAntiepilepticdrugCapsaicinConventional analgesics:APAP, NSAIDs, Coxibs, OpioidsSomatic painFailFailFailFailFailAddNoNoYesYes
Fig. 93.4
 Algorithm for selection of conventional and nonconvention
-
al analgesics. APAP, Acetaminophen; CDH, chronic daily headaches; 
CRPS, complex regional pain syndrome; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiin
-
flammatory drugs.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
691
or oppositional behavior, agitation, and occasionally depression. These 
side effects do not seem to be dose related.
Pregabalin
 works by similar mechanisms as gabapentin and may 
have a lower side effect profile. It is most often dosed twice a day rather 
than three times a day, which may lead to increased adherence. Both 
gabapentin and pregabalin undergo virtually no hepatic metabolism, 
with no significant drug- drug interactions, a common concern in 
patients	with	chronic	pain,	who	frequently	take	multiple	medications—
for both the pain and the underlying medical condition associated with 
the pain. However, because both AEDs depend on renal function for 
clearance, doses must be adjusted in the presence of renal dysfunction.
Topiramate
 also demonstrates greater success than traditional 
AEDs in treating trigeminal neuralgia in adults and in migraine pro
-
phylaxis.	Topiramate	is	approved	for	migraine	prophylaxis	in	children	
and	adolescents	from	the	age	of	12-	17.	Topiramate	therapy	results	
more frequently in cognitive dysfunction and short- term memory 
loss than gabapentin or pregabalin, and although these neurocognitive 
effects are often well tolerated, they should be monitored. The pedia
-
trician should also be aware that topiramate is associated with weight 
loss, whereas other AEDs are typically associated with significant 
weight gain. This side effect is particularly valuable in weight- conscious 
adolescents,	whereas	in	the	anorexic	cancer	patient,	a	TCA	would	be	
preferable to induce appetite and weight gain. In at- risk populations, 
routine weight checks are recommended.
 
Benzodiazepines
Children and adolescents with chronic pain may have comorbid psy
-
chologic conditions, such as depressed mood, sleep disturbances, and 
anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, separation 
anxiety,	posttraumatic	stress	disorder	(PTSD),	and	panic	attacks.	Psy
-
chologic factors affect a youth’s perception of pain and mechanisms 
of coping with a pain disorder. A 
conditioned response
 to pain may be 
to feel out of control and increase anxiety and pain, and conversely, 
anticipatory anxiety
 related to pain will inhibit activities and recovery. 
Feelings of helplessness sensitize the child to increasing amounts of 
pain, leading the child to perseverate on pain, think catastrophically, 
and feel hopeless. Changes in children’s normal routines, with a nega
-
tive impact on participation in valued activities, may further promote 
hopelessness, resulting in increased pain experiences and development 
of a depressive disorder.
Benzodiazepines are anxiolytic medications that also have muscle 
relaxant effects. They have a role in the treatment of acute pain in the 
hospital, where they are useful adjuncts because they inhibit painful 
muscle spasms in postsurgical patients. They also can suppress the 
anxiety that often occurs in hospitalized children, anxiety that inter
-
feres with restorative sleep and amplifies the child’s perception of pain. 
Benzodiazepines are useful to calm children with anxiety and antici
-
patory anxiety about planned painful procedures. They are frequently 
used as a part of procedural sedation or preoperatively before surgical 
procedures.
Because dependence, tolerance, and withdrawal may occur with 
prolonged use, benzodiazepines are generally not recommended for 
the routine management of 
chronic pain
 or anxiety in children. Fur
-
ther, the risk of respiratory depression when benzodiazepines are com
-
bined with opioid therapy has contributed to the increasing number 
of opioid- related deaths in the United States. In concert with psycho
-
therapy, benzodiazepines may help control anxiety symptoms that 
amplify the perception of pain, but we recommend the appropriate use 
of benzodiazepines in the chronic setting occur under the direction of 
a psychiatrist. In addition, other alternatives such as hydroxyzine may 
provide similar benefit without the negative aspects encountered with 
chronic benzodiazepine use.
Infrequently, benzodiazepines may cause behavioral disinhibition, 
psychosis- like behaviors, or, in large doses, respiratory depression. 
When dosing these medications, the pediatrician should consider 
that many benzodiazepines are metabolized by the cytochrome P450 
microsomal enzyme system. This issue may be less significant with 
lorazepam and oxazepam, which undergo first- pass hepatic conjuga
-
tion. Side effects common to benzodiazepines include sedation, ataxia, 
anemia, increased bronchial secretions, and depressed mood. If a 
benzodiazepine is administered for more than 5 consecutive days, the 
dosage should be slowly tapered. Abrupt discontinuation of therapy 
can lead to autonomic instability, delirium, agitation, seizures, and pro
-
found insomnia. The routine use of benzodiazepines to treat anxiety 
during hospitalization is not recommended and should only be used 
under expert guidance.
 
Antipsychotics and Major Sedatives
Low doses of antipsychotic medications are often used to address 
the more severe anxiety, agitation, and behavioral decompensation 
sometimes associated with severe pain. The use of these medications 
is controversial because associated adverse events may be severe and 
irreversible.	Typical	antipsychotics	used	in	the	past,	including	thiorida
-
zine (Mellaril), haloperidol (Haldol), and chlorpromazine (Thorazine), 
are associated with a decreased seizure threshold, dystonia, agranulo
-
cytosis, weight gain, cardiac conduction disturbances, tardive dyskine
-
sia, orthostatic hypotension, hepatic dysfunction, and life- threatening 
laryngeal dystonia and have little role in the routine treatment of pain 
in children. Chlorpromazine is approved in adults for intractable 
hiccups, and its use may be appropriate in select settings such as the 
palliative setting, although this is not considered a first- line medica
-
tion. Side effects are generally less severe with atypical antipsychotics. 
Because these effects may still occur, however, the pediatrician should 
obtain a baseline ECG, liver function values, and CBC and, if possi
-
ble, obtain a child psychiatry consultation. If the pediatrician is using 
typical antipsychotics, an inventory of movement disturbances, such 
as the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) test, should be 
performed at baseline and at every follow- up visit, because movement 
disorders can worsen with abrupt withdrawal of medications or can 
become irreversible.
Atypical antipsychotics
 are generally associated with less severe 
side effect profiles, particularly dyskinesias and dystonias. Use of olan
-
zapine (Zyprexa), which is particularly helpful with insomnia and 
severe anxiety, requires assessing and monitoring blood levels of glu
-
cose, cholesterol, and triglyceride; olanzapine’s side effects may include 
diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, or significant weight gain. The anti
-
cholinergic side effects associated with quetiapine (Seroquel) warrant 
frequent monitoring of blood pressure. Risperidone at doses >6 mg 
may cause side effects similar to those of typical antipsychotics. Aripip
-
razole (Abilify) has been used for severe anxiety and/or for treatment- 
resistant depression. All antipsychotics are associated with the rare but 
potentially lethal 
neuroleptic malignant syndrome
, which includes 
severe autonomic instability, muscular rigidity, hyperthermia, catato
-
nia, and altered mental status (see 
Chapter 33
).
 
Other Pain Control Medications
Alpha- adrenergic receptor agonists such as clonidine are typically used 
as antihypertensive agents. However, they are often helpful as both anx
-
iolytics and sleep- onset agents in the anxious hospitalized child. The 
α
- agonists also have central effects on pain reduction. 
Clonidine
 can 
be given orally or transdermally if the child’s blood pressure permits. 
In certain settings, IV 
dexmedetomidine
, an 
α
- agonist sedating agent, 
can be used preoperatively for anxiety, in the intensive care unit (ICU) 
for sedation, and may be used for pain in certain circumstances. Wean
-
ing off dexmedetomidine can often be accomplished with a transition 
to clonidine. 
Propranolol
 and metoprolol are both 
β
- blocking agents 
typically used for the child with autonomic instability and for tha
-
lamic storm. They may also be used in migraine prophylaxis. There are 
reports that 
β
 blockers can enhance depression in a child who already 
has a major depressive disorder, and discussion with a child psychia
-
trist may be helpful in decisions about using propranolol if needed. 
Both clonidine and propranolol have been found useful for the agitated 
child with ASD. Another 
α
- agonist, 
guanfacine
, is more likely to be 
used during the day for the child with ASD because it is less sedating 
than clonidine. Despite research on the impact of clonidine on chronic 
pain, no data are available to determine if guanfacine is as effective in 
reducing pain. 
Ketamine
, a blocker of 
N
- methyl- 
d
- aspartate (NMDA) 
receptors, has been used for intractable pain in hospitalized children 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

692 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
and in outpatients with severe sickle cell disease–related chronic pain, 
as well as others in palliative care for whom opioids are not sufficient to 
reduce pain. Recommended doses for pain management in non- ICU 
settings are between 0.1 and 0.3 mg/kg/hr
. Higher doses may result 
in increased side effects, sedation with little benefit, and possible ICU 
admission. Because ketamine can have central hallucinatory effects, 
such children should be monitored closely.
 
NONPHARMACOLOGIC TREATMENT OF PAIN
Numerous psychologic and physical treatments for relieving pain, 
fear, and anxiety as well as enhancing functioning have excellent safety 
profiles and proven effectiveness and should always be considered for 
incorporation into pediatric pain treatment (
Fig. 93.5
). In acute and 
procedural pain, nonpharmacologic strategies have long been used to 
help reduce distress in children undergoing medical procedures and 
surgery. Many of these methods aim to help children shift attention 
from pain and alter pain perception (e.g., distraction, hypnosis, imag
-
ery). Similarly, in the treatment of chronic pain, several strategies, often 
falling under the umbrella category of 
cognitive- behavioral therapies 
(CBTs)
, have been shown to reduce pain and improve functioning and 
quality	of	life.	CBT	was	developed	with	the	goal	of	modifying	social/
environmental and behavioral factors that may exacerbate the child’s 
experience of pain and pain- related disability. Meta- analyses of ran
-
domized	controlled	trials	(RCTs)	of	CBT	interventions	have	found	
large positive effects of psychologic intervention on reductions in 
pain and/or its deleterious effects in children with headache, abdomi
-
nal pain, and fibromyalgia, with relative or comparative effectiveness 
of different interventions examined in areas such as headache and 
abdominal pain in children. 
Biofeedback
 and 
relaxation therapies
 
have been found to have superior effects to pharmacologic treatments 
in reducing headache pain in children and adolescents. Similarly, for 
recurrent	abdominal	pain,	positive	effects	for	CBT	were	found	rela
-
tive to attention- control conditions and pharmaceutical, botanical, and 
dietary interventions (which had very weak evidence). Positive results 
have even resulted from very brief (three sessions) and remotely deliv
-
ered (telephone or internet) therapies, with outcomes lasting up to 12 
months after intervention.
When deciding how to incorporate nonpharmacologic techniques to 
treat pain, the practitioner should (1) conduct a thorough assessment 
of individual, social, and environmental factors that may be contribut
-
ing to the patient’s pain and functioning limitations; (2) based on this 
assessment, decide whether nonpharmacologic techniques alone may 
be sufficient as a beginning to treatment or if these treatments should 
be integrated with appropriate analgesics; (3) give children (and family 
members) developmentally and situationally appropriate information 
as to the rationale for treatment selection and what to expect, given 
the child’s medical condition, procedures, and treatments; (4) include 
patients and their families in decision- making to ensure an appropri
-
ate treatment choice and to optimize adherence to treatment protocols; 
and (5) above all, develop a communication plan among the different 
care providers, typically with the pediatrician as the case manager, so 
that the messages to the child and parent are consistent and the modes 
of therapy are organized into an integrative team approach. Finally, it 
is important to recognize that in addition to pain, other psychologic 
disorders (e.g., anxiety disorders, major depression) may affect the pre
-
senting pain complaint and may need to be identified and addressed as 
part of, or separate from, the pain management plan. Individual psy
-
chotherapy or psychiatric intervention may be warranted to adequately 
treat a comorbid disorder.
CBT	strategies	refer	to	a	range	of	techniques	that	teach	children	(and	
their caregivers) how to manage pain by learning new ways to think 
about the pain and how to change behaviors associated with it. Strate
-
gies focusing on 
cognitions
 are typically aimed at enhancing parents’ 
and children’s confidence and self- efficacy to handle pain and decrease 
fear of pain. In addition, pain coping skills may shift the child’s atten
-
tional focus away from pain and painful stimuli.
The goals of those strategies focusing on 
behavior change
 are to 
modify (1) contingencies in the child’s environment, such as teaching 
parents how to respond to pain behaviors in ways that encourage well
-
ness, rather than illness behaviors; (2) the ways parents model reac
-
tions to pain or discomfort; (3) child and parent coping techniques 
when psychosocial distress or problems in social relations exist; and 
(4) the child’s behavioral reactions to situations, such as relaxation and 
exposure to previously avoided activities. Common examples of these 
strategies are discussed in the next several paragraphs. Whereas com
-
prehensive	CBTs	are	typically	conducted	by	trained	mental	health	spe
-
cialists	over	several	sessions,	some	basic	CBT	strategies	can	be	briefly	
and easily introduced by practitioners into most medical settings. If 
more	in-	depth	CBT	treatment	is	needed,	a	referral	to	a	qualified	mental	
health	specialist	with	CBT	skills	is	warranted.
Parent and family education
 and/or 
psychotherapy
, particu
-
larly within cognitive- behavioral family approaches, is one treatment 
modality through which these goals are accomplished and has been 
shown to be effective for treating chronic pain. Parents can learn to 
cope with their own distress and to understand pain mechanisms and 
appropriate treatment of pain. Key components include teaching par
-
ents to alter family patterns that may inadvertently exacerbate pain 
through developing behavior plans. Parents are taught to create plans 
for the child to manage the child’s own symptoms and increase inde
-
pendent functioning. Often, adult caregivers (e.g., parents, teachers) 
need only guidance on developing a behavioral incentive plan to help 
the child return to school, gradually increase attendance, and receive 
tutoring after a prolonged, pain- related absence. 
Suggested sample brief 
strategy:
 Ask caregivers how they react to the child’s pain complaints; 
assess whether they encourage wellness activities or give attention and 
“rewards” primarily when the child says he or she does not feel well; 
and suggest that caregivers respond to the child in ways that encourage 
wellness, both when complaining and not complaining.
Neonate
Physicalcomfort
measures
Distractingactivities
Oral stimulation: breastfeeding, pacifier, suckingTouch: stroking, rubbing, pattingCold and heatPuppets, imitation gameArt: drawing, coloring, play doughInteractive games: video games, movies, computer games, booksGuided imagery, hypnosisBlowing bubbles, lighted wand, sound, music, booksPhysical contact: skin-to-skin contact, rocking,cuddling, swaddling, kangaroo care
InfantPreschoolSchool-ageAdolescent
Fig. 93.5
 Nonpharmacologic interventions for pediatric pain. 
(From Krauss BS, Calligaris L, Green SM, Barbi E. Current concepts in management 
of pain in children in the emergency department. Lancet. 2016;387:83–92.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
693
Relaxation training
 is often employed to promote muscle relaxation 
and reduction of anxiety, which often accompanies and increases pain. 
Relaxation training, along with distraction and biofeedback, are treat
-
ments	often	included	in	CBT,	but	also	are	discussed	in	the	literature	
without	mention	of	CBT.
Controlled breathing
 and 
progressive muscle relaxation
 are com
-
monly used relaxation techniques taught to preschool- age and older 
children. 
Suggested sample brief strategy:
 Ask the child (or instruct the 
caregiver to do so) to practice the following and use if pain is com
-
ing on: focus on the breath and pretend to be blowing up a big bal
-
loon while pursing the lips and exhaling slowly. This is one way to help 
induce controlled breathing.
Distraction
 can be used to help a child of any age shift attention 
away from pain and onto other activities. Common attention sustain
-
ers in the environment include bubbles, music, video games, television, 
the telephone, conversation, school, and play. Asking children to tell 
stories, asking parents to read to the child, and even mutual storytelling 
can be helpful distracters. Being involved with social, school, physical, 
or other activities helps the child in chronic pain to regain function. 
Suggested sample brief strategy:
 Encourage the child (or instruct the 
caregiver to do so) to shift attention away from the pain by continuing 
to engage in other activities and/or think of something else.
Biofeedback
 involves controlled breathing, relaxation, or hypnotic 
techniques with a computer synchronized device that provides visual 
or auditory feedback to the child when the desired action is approxi
-
mated. Common targets of actions include muscle tension, peripheral 
skin temperature through peripheral vasodilation, and anal control 
through rectal muscle contraction and relaxation. Biofeedback also 
enhances the child’s sense of mastery and control, especially for the 
child who needs more “proof” of change than that generated through 
hypnotherapy alone.
Hypnotherapy
 has also been used in the treatment of chronic pain in 
children, although the evidence for its effectiveness has not been as exten
-
sively	studied	as	CBT.	Hypnotherapy	helps	a	child	focus	on	an	imagina
-
tive experience that is comforting, safe, fun, or intriguing. Hypnotherapy 
captures the child’s attention, alters his or her sensory experiences, reduces 
distress, reframes pain experiences, creates time distortions, helps the 
child dissociate from the pain, and enhances feelings of mastery and self- 
control. Children with chronic pain can use 
metaphor,
 for example, imag
-
ining they have overcome something feared because of pain in real life. As 
the child increases mastery of imagined experiences, the enhanced sense 
of control can be used during actual pain rehabilitation. Hypnotherapy is 
best for children of school age or older.
Nonpharmacologic treatments of pain may also be applied to other 
treatment needs. A child who learns relaxation to reduce distress from 
lumbar punctures in cancer treatment may also apply this skill to other 
stressful medical and nonmedical situations, such as stressors caused 
by school.
Yoga is intended to achieve balance in mind, body, and spirit. 
Thera
-
peutic yoga
 can be helpful in treating chronic pain; improving mood, 
energy, and sleep; and reducing anxiety. Yoga involves a series of 
asanas
 
(body poses) oriented to the specific medical condition or symptoms. 
Some forms of yoga use poses within a movement flow and format. 
Iyengar
 yoga is an alignment- based system that uses props, such as 
blankets, bolsters, blocks, and belts, to support the body while the prac
-
titioner assumes more healing poses. Yoga promotes a sense of energy, 
relaxation, strength, balance, and flexibility and, over time, enhances 
a sense of mastery and control. Within a yoga practice, the child may 
learn certain types of breathing 
(pranayama)
 for added benefit. With 
a focus on body postures or in types of flow yoga, the child learns 
mindfulness or being present in the moment. By focusing on body and 
breath, the child can develop strategies to avoid ruminating about the 
past or worrying about the future.
Mindfulness meditation
 involves a focus on the present, “in- the- 
moment” experience using a variety of strategies. Many studies in 
adults report the value of meditation for chronic pain states and for 
anxiety and depression. These strategies help children learn how to be 
mindful and in the present with enhanced parasympathetic control. 
Many mindfulness smartphone applications are geared to children of 
different ages, as well as books for parents on how to help their chil
-
dren achieve a mindful state to enhance relaxation. Although there are 
different schools of mindfulness, such as 
Vipassana
 (insight- oriented 
meditation, often using a focus on the breath) and 
transcendental
 med
-
itation (in which the child learns the use of a silent mantra to facilitate 
acquiring a deeper inner calmness), the goal is to help the child learn 
strategies that enhance self- competence in reducing stress and enhanc
-
ing a state of well- being.
Massage therapy
 involves the therapist’s touching and applying var
-
ied degrees of pressure on the child’s muscles. Massage is very useful 
for children with chronic pain and especially helpful for those with 
myofascial pain. There are several types of massage, including cranio
-
sacral therapy. For young children, it can be helpful to have parents 
learn and perform brief massage on their children before bedtime. 
Massage therapy likely will not be helpful to or tolerated by the child 
with sensory sensitivity and sensory aversion.
Physical therapy
 can be especially useful for children with chronic 
musculoskeletal pain and for those deconditioned from inactivity. 
Exercise appears specifically to benefit muscle functioning, circulation, 
and posture while also improving body image, body mechanics, sleep, 
and mood. The physical therapist and the child can develop a graded 
exercise plan for enhancing the child’s overall function for the child to 
continue at home. Research indicates that physical therapy affects cen
-
tral neurobiologic mechanisms that enhance “top- down” pain control.
Acupuncture/acupressure
 involves the placement of needles or 
pressure at specific points along a 
meridian,
 or energy field, after the 
acupuncturist has made a diagnosis of excess or deficient energy in 
that meridian as the primary cause of the pain. Acupuncture/acupres
-
sure is a feasible, popular part of a pain management plan for children 
with chronic pain. Acupuncture/acupressure alleviates chronic nau
-
sea, fatigue, and several chronic pain states, including migraine and 
chronic daily headaches, abdominal pain, and myofascial pain. Acu
-
puncture/acupressure also has efficacy in adults with myofascial pain, 
primary dysmenorrhea, sickle cell crisis pain, and sore throat pain. The 
acupuncturist must relate well to children so that the experience is not 
traumatic, because added stress would undo the benefits gained.
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS)
 is the use of a 
battery- operated tool worn on the body to send electrical impulses into 
the	body	at	certain	frequencies	set	by	the	machine.	TENS	is	believed	
to be safe and can be tried for many forms of localized pain. Children 
often	find	TENS	helpful	and	effective.
Music therapy
 and 
art therapy
 can be especially helpful for young 
and nonverbal children who would otherwise have trouble with tra
-
ditional talk psychotherapies. Also, many creative children can more 
easily express fears and negative emotions through creative expression 
and, with the therapist’s help, learn about themselves in the process. 
There is also increasing research on the impact of art and music therapy 
on altering central neural circuits that maintain and enhance pain.
Dance, movement, pet therapies,
 and 
aromatherapy
 have also 
been used and may be helpful, but these have not been as well studied 
in children for pain control as have other complementary therapies. 
Often, clinical experience helps guide the pediatrician in the benefits 
of these therapies with individual patients. For example, pet therapy is 
gaining favor in hospitals and in stress reduction for sick children. Pets 
often can become self- regulators for the child with ASD, although the 
neurobiologic mechanisms are not yet understood.
 
INVASIVE INTERVENTIONS FOR TREATING PAIN
Various interventional neuraxial and peripheral nerve blocks may 
have a role in the treatment of pain acutely (e.g., long- bone fracture), 
perioperatively, and for the patient with chronic pain (e.g., headache, 
abdominal pain, complex regional pain syndrome [CRPS], or cancer 
pain). Interventions also provide intraoperative anesthesia and post
-
operative analgesia (see 
Chapter 91
). Use of interventional procedures 
varies greatly across institutions; they may be frequently used at some 
hospitals, whereas other institutions focus mainly on noninterven
-
tional treatment plans. Interventional procedures may be useful in 
some children who have specific types of chronic pain, but their use 
in children (as widely practiced in adult pain clinics) generally is not 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

694 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
recommended because the pediatric research is insufficient. There
-
fore the data are largely extrapolated from the adult population. Use 
of such procedures in children should generally not be considered or 
undertaken by an adult chronic pain provider who is willing to per
-
form such a procedure on a child or adolescent. Rather, the potential 
procedure or block should be undertaken only at the direction or guid
-
ance of a pediatric pain specialist. Complications and lack of benefit 
can occur in children, as may occur in adults; however, more harm may 
be done in the pediatric populations. This is especially true as children 
and families may “pin their hopes” on a particular intervention “cur
-
ing their child,” when in reality chronic pain is a complex phenom
-
enon that responds best to multidisciplinary management. This does 
not mean that no block should be recommended in children, but that 
procedural interventions should be used judiciously, appropriately, and 
in conjunction with other biopsychosocial treatments by or under the 
guidance of a pediatric pain expert.
Regional anesthesia
 provides several benefits, particularly in the 
acute perioperative setting. As an alternative to or in augmentation 
of opioid- based pain control, regional anesthesia minimizes opioid 
requirements and therefore opioid side effects, including nausea, vom
-
iting, somnolence, respiratory depression, pruritus, constipation, and 
physical dependence. It can provide equal or improved analgesia, as it 
interrupts nociceptive pathways and may profoundly inhibit endocrine 
stress responses. Regional anesthesia also results in earlier ambulation 
in recovering surgical patients, helps prevent atelectasis in the patient 
with chest pain, and usually results in earlier discharge from the hos
-
pital. Theoretically, the interruption of nociceptive pathways in the 
periphery by regional anesthetics will prevent or reverse the process of 
amplification of pain signals induced by nociception (e.g., CNS wind-
 up, glial cell activation). For postoperative pain, effective regional anes
-
thesia reduces the risks of acute pain evolving to chronic pain. Regional 
anesthesia is considered safe and effective if performed by trained staff 
with the proper instruments and equipment. Most frequently, nerve 
blocks are performed by an anesthesiologist or pain management phy
-
sician; a few are easily performed by a nonanesthesiologist with appro
-
priate training. The benefits of regional anesthesia are dependent on 
adequate coverage of the surgical area, the patient and family’s expec
-
tation of the block, and the expertise of the provider performing the 
block. When procedures fail to provide adequate analgesia, it can lead 
to the need to “catch up” with pain control after surgery.
Head and Neck Blocks
Primary pain syndromes of the head, such as trigeminal neuralgia, are 
distinctly unusual in the pediatric population, and few surgical proce
-
dures in the head and neck are amenable to regional anesthesia. Head
-
ache disorders, very common in the pediatric age- group, may respond 
well to regional anesthesia of the greater occipital nerve. However, this 
is not generally considered a first- line treatment of pediatric headache. 
The greater occipital nerve (second cervical, C2) provides sensation 
to much of the cranial structures, from the upper cervical region, the 
occiput to the apex of the head, or even to the hairline. The greater 
occipital nerve can be blocked medial to the occipital artery, which can 
usually be identified at the occipital ridge midway between the occipi
-
tal prominence and the mastoid process by palpation, Doppler sound 
amplification, or visualization by ultrasound. The short- term and 
especially long- lasting effects of nerve blocks for chronic headaches in 
children have not been documented by research. Studies are needed to 
determine which children with which types of headaches will benefit 
most from occipital nerve blocks. Sphenopalatine blocks are increas
-
ingly used in the treatment of multiple types of headaches in adults, 
including migraine and postdural puncture headache (PDPH). There 
is some evidence to support the benefit of this procedure in children 
and adolescents. The sphenopalatine ganglion (SPG) is a collection of 
cells closely related to the trigeminal nerve that plays a role in headache 
pathology. This block can be performed in a minimally invasive fash
-
ion through the nasal cavity. The procedure may be performed either 
with the use of marketed devices or with the use of cotton- tipped appli
-
cators. SPG blocks may be performed with or without fluoroscopic 
guidance.
Onabotulinum toxin A (Botox) may also be used for the treatment 
of chronic migraine in children and adolescents. As with many inter
-
ventions, the available data for benefit of this treatment for pediatric 
migraine are lacking compared with the adult data. However, many 
children or adolescents, who may have experienced treatment failure 
with medical management of headache, may be considered as candi
-
dates for the use of Botox.
 
Upper Extremity Blocks
The brachial plexus block controls pain of the upper extremity. These 
blocks also protect the extremity from movement, reduce arterial 
spasm, and block sympathetic tone of the upper extremity. The bra
-
chial plexus, responsible for cutaneous and motor innervation of the 
upper extremity, is an arrangement of nerve fibers originating from 
spinal	nerves	C5	through	T1,	extending	from	the	neck	into	the	axilla,	
arm, and hand. The brachial plexus innervates the entire upper limb, 
except for the trapezius muscle and an area of skin near the axilla. 
If pain is located proximal to the elbow, the brachial plexus may be 
blocked above the clavicle (roots and trunks); if the pain is located 
distal to the elbow, the brachial plexus may be blocked at the axilla 
(cords and nerves). The block may be given as a single injection with 
a long- acting anesthetic such as bupivacaine or ropivacaine. This may 
provide up to 12- 16 hours of analgesia. Use of a catheter and infu
-
sion pump may increase duration and provide continuous analgesia 
for several days.
 
Trunk and Abdominal Visceral Blocks
Trunk	blocks	provide	somatic	and	visceral	analgesia	and	anesthesia	for	
pain or surgery of the thorax and abdominal area. Sympathetic, motor, 
and sensory blockade may be obtained. These blocks are often used 
in combination to provide optimal relief. Intercostal and paraverte
-
bral blocks may be beneficial in patients for whom a thoracic epidural 
injection or catheter is contraindicated (e.g., patient with coagulopa
-
thy). Respiratory function is maintained, and the side effects of opioid 
therapy are eliminated.
The intercostal, paravertebral, erector spinae, rectus sheath, and 
transverse abdominal plane blocks are most useful for pediatric chest 
and somatic abdominal pain. The celiac plexus and splanchnic nerve 
block can be useful for abdominal visceral pain, such as that caused 
by malignancy or pancreatitis. These blocks are best performed by an 
experienced anesthesiologist, pain physician, or interventional radi
-
ologist	using	ultrasound	or	CT	imaging	guidance.
The 
intercostal block
 is used to block the intercostal nerves, the 
anterior	rami	of	the	thoracic	nerves	from	T1	to	T11.	These	nerves	
lie inferior to each rib, between the inner and innermost intercostal 
muscles with their corresponding vein and artery, where they can be 
blocked, generally posterior to the posterior axillary line. Guidance 
with either fluoroscopy or ultrasound is often employed to decrease 
risks associated with this block. With use of ultrasound imaging, the 
intercostal nerves and the pleura can be identified, which can decrease 
risks such as pneumothorax or hemothorax that are associated with 
this procedure. The 
erector spinae plane
 block has also shown to be 
effective for blocking several levels of intercostal nerves while avoiding 
the attendant risks of multilevel intercostal nerve blocks.
The 
paravertebral block
, another alternative to intercostal nerve 
block or epidural analgesia, is useful for pain associated with thora
-
cotomy or with unilateral abdominal surgery, such as nephrectomy 
or splenectomy. Essentially this block results in multiple intercostal 
blocks with a single injection. The thoracic paravertebral space, lateral 
to the vertebral column, contains the sympathetic chain, rami com
-
municantes, dorsal and ventral roots of the spinal nerves, and dorsal 
root ganglion. Because it is a continuous space, local anesthetic injec
-
tion will provide sensory, motor, and sympathetic blockade to several 
dermatomes. The paravertebral block may be performed as a single 
injection or, for a very prolonged effect, as a continuous infusion over 
several days or weeks via a catheter. This block is best performed by 
an anesthesiologist or interventional pain physician under ultrasound 
guidance.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
695
Ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerve blocks
 are indicated with 
surgery for inguinal hernia repair, hydrocele, or orchidopexy repair 
and for chronic pain subsequent to these procedures. The first lum
-
bar (L1) nerve divides into the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves, 
which emerge from the lateral border of the psoas major muscle. The 
iliohypogastric nerve supplies the suprapubic area as it pierces the 
transversus abdominis muscle and runs deep to the internal oblique 
muscle. The ilioinguinal nerve supplies the upper medial thigh and 
superior inguinal region, as it also pierces the transversus abdominis 
muscle and runs across the inguinal canal. Ultrasound guidance helps 
ensure success for this nerve block.
The 
celiac plexus block
 is indicated for surgery or pain of the pan
-
creas and upper abdominal viscera. The celiac plexus, located on each 
side of the L1 vertebral body, contains one to five ganglia. The aorta 
lies posterior, the pancreas anterior, and the inferior vena cava lateral 
to these nerves. The celiac plexus receives sympathetic fibers from the 
greater, lesser, and least splanchnic nerves, as well as from parasym
-
pathetic fibers from the vagus nerve. Autonomic fibers from the liver, 
gallbladder, pancreas, stomach, spleen, kidneys, intestines, and adrenal 
glands originate from the celiac plexus. This block is best performed 
with	CT	guidance	to	provide	direct	visualization	of	the	appropriate	
landmarks, avoid vascular and visceral structures, and confirm correct 
needle placement. The close proximity of structures such as the aorta 
and vena cava make this a technical procedure best performed by an 
anesthesiologist, interventional pain physician, or interventional radi
-
ologist. The evidence for use of this block for chronic pediatric pain 
is lacking; as such, this block should not be routinely employed in the 
treatment of chronic noncancer pain.
Nerve blocks have been used for the treatment of 
anterior cutaneous 
nerve entrapment syndrome (ACNES)
. ACNES is characterized by pain 
associated with use of abdominal muscles. On exam, this can be identi
-
fied via Carnett sign. Pathology and causation in the pediatric popula
-
tion	are	not	well	understood.	Treatment	may	include	identification	of	
a specific pain source under ultrasound guidance with infiltration of a 
local anesthetic or local anesthetic and steroid mixture. Evidence for 
use of this procedure is limited.
 
Lower Extremity Blocks
Lumbar plexus and sciatic nerve blocks
 provide pain control for pain
-
ful conditions or surgical procedures of the lower extremities, with the 
benefit of providing analgesia to only one extremity while preserving 
motor and sensory function of the other. The lumbosacral plexus is 
an arrangement of nerve fibers originating from spinal nerves L2- L4 
and S1- S3. The lumbar plexus arises from L2- L4 and forms the lateral 
femoral cutaneous, femoral, and obturator nerves. These nerves supply 
the muscles and sensation of the upper leg, with a sensory branch of the 
femoral nerve (saphenous nerve) extending below the knee to inner
-
vate the medial aspect of the foreleg, ankle, and foot. The sacral plexus 
arises from L4- S3 and divides into the major branches of the sciatic, 
tibial, and common peroneal nerves. These nerves in turn supply the 
posterior thigh, lower leg, and foot. Unlike the brachial plexus block, 
blockade of the entire lower extremity requires more than one injection 
because the lumbosacral sheath is not accessible. Separate injections 
are necessary for the posterior (sciatic) and anterior (lumbar plexus) 
branches, and the injections can be performed at any of several levels 
during the course of the nerve, as is clinically expedient. The lumbar 
plexus can be blocked in the back, resulting in analgesia of the femoral, 
lateral femoral cutaneous, and obturator nerves. Alternatively, any of 
these three nerves can be individually anesthetized, depending on the 
location of the pain. Similarly, the sciatic nerve can be anesthetized 
proximally as it emerges from the pelvis or, more distally, in the pos
-
terior thigh, or its major branches (tibial and peroneal nerves) can be 
individually anesthetized. These nerve blocks are generally best per
-
formed by an anesthesiologist, pain physician, or radiologist.
 
Sympathetic Blocks
Sympathetic blocks were once thought to be useful in the diagnosis 
and treatment of sympathetically mediated pain, CRPS (
Table	93.17
), 
and other neuropathic pain conditions (
Table	93.18
), but large meta- 
analyses have shown their utility to be minimal. When blocks of the 
sympathetic plexuses are performed, sympathectomy is obtained 
able 93.17 
 
  Budapest Criteria for Clinical Diagnosis 
 
of CRPS
 1.  
Pain
 (ongoing and disproportionate to any inciting event)
 2.  
Symptoms (reported):
 At least one symptom in three out of four 
of the following categories:
	•		
Sensory
 – Hyperesthesia and/or allodynia
	•		
Vasomotor
 – Temperature asymmetry and/or skin color changes and/or 
skin color asymmetry
	•		
Sudomotor/Edema
 – Edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating 
asymmetry
	•		
Motor/Trophic
 – Decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction 
(weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail, skin)
 3.  
Signs (examined):
 At least one sign in two out of four of the 
 
following categories:
	•		
Sensory
 – Hyperalgesia (to pinprick) and/or allodynia (to light touch and/
or temperature sensation and/or deep somatic pressure and/or joint 
movement)
	•		
Vasomotor
	–	Temperature	asymmetry	(>1°C)	and/or	skin	color	changes	
and/or asymmetry
	•		
Sudomotor/Edema
 – Edema and/or sweating changes and/or sweating 
asymmetry
	•		
Motor/Trophic
 – Decreased range of motion and/or motor dysfunction 
(weakness, tremor, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail, skin)
 4.  
Diagnosis of exclusion:
 No other diagnosis better explains the 
signs and symptoms.
CRPS, Complex regional pain syndrome
From Davis PJ, Cladis FP, eds. 
Smith’s Anesthesia for Infants and Children,
 10th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, 
Box 25.1
, p. 583.
Table 93.18 
 
  Examples of Neuropathic Pain Syndromes
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM FOCAL AND 
 
MULTIFOCAL LESIONS
Postherpetic neuralgia
Cranial neuralgias (e.g., trigeminal neuralgia, glossopharyngeal 
neuralgia)
Diabetic mononeuropathy
Nerve entrapment syndromes
Plexopathy from malignancy or irradiation
Phantom limb pain
Posttraumatic neuralgia (e.g., nerve root compression, after 
thoracotomy)
Ischemic neuropathy
Complex regional pain syndrome types 1 and 2
Erythromelalgia
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM GENERALIZED 
 
POLYNEUROPATHIES
Metabolic/nutritional:
 Diabetes mellitus, pellagra, beriberi, multiple 
nutritional deficiency, hypothyroidism
Toxic:
 Alcohol- , platinum- , or taxane- based chemotherapy; isoniazid; 
antiretroviral drugs
Infective/autoimmune:
 HIV, acute inflammatory polyneuropathy 
(Guillain- Barré syndrome), neuroborreliosis (Bannwarth syndrome)
Hereditary:
 Fabry disease
Malignancy:
 Carcinomatosis
Others:
 Idiopathic small fiber neuropathy, erythromelalgia
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM LESIONS
Spinal cord injury
Prolapsed disc
Stroke (brain infarction, spinal infarction)
Multiple sclerosis
Surgical lesions (e.g., rhizotomy, cordotomy)
Complex neuropathic disorders
Complex regional pain syndrome types 1 and 2
Adapted from Freynhagen R, Bennett MI. Diagnosis and management of neuropathic 
pain. 
BMJ
. 2009;339:b3002.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

696 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
without attendant motor or sensory anesthesia. Their use for pain man
-
agement was grounded in the notion that many types of chronic pain 
were mediated via the sympathetic nerves. This mechanistic model has 
been proven to be false.
The 
stellate ganglion block
 was indicated for pain in the face or 
upper extremity and for CRPS, phantom limb pain, amputation stump 
pain, or circulatory insufficiency of the upper extremities. The lum
-
bar sympathetic block addressed pain in the lower extremity, CRPS, 
phantom limb pain, amputation stump pain, and pain from circulatory 
insufficiency.
The analgesia produced by peripheral sympathetic blocks usually 
outlives the duration of the local anesthetic, often persisting for weeks or 
indefinitely. If analgesia is transient, the blocks may be performed with 
catheter insertion for continuous local anesthesia of the sympathetic 
chain over days or weeks. Because precise, radiographically guided 
placement of the needle and/or catheter is required for safety and suc
-
cess, sympathetic blocks are generally best performed by an anesthesi
-
ologist, interventional pain physician, or interventional radiologist.
While all these procedures can be considered for the treatment of 
certain chronic pediatric pain conditions, there is overall a lack of evi
-
dence to support routine use in children and adolescents. This infor
-
mation should be used for learning and awareness rather than as a 
guide map for specific treatment of these conditions. When needed, a 
dedicated pediatric pain provider should be consulted and these blocks 
used judiciously when appropriate.
In addition, any time these procedures are considered for the treat
-
ment of chronic pain, special consideration should be given to poten
-
tial risks and complications.
 
Epidural Anesthesia (Thoracic, Lumbar, and Caudal)
Epidural anesthesia and analgesia are indicated for pain below the 
clavicles, management of regional pain syndromes, cancer pain unre
-
sponsive to systemic opioids, and pain limited by opioid side effects.
The	three	layers	of	the	spinal	meninges—dura	mater	(outer),	arach
-
noid	mater	(middle),	and	pia	mater	(inner)—envelop	the	spinal	neural	
tissue. The subarachnoid space contains cerebrospinal fluid between 
the arachnoid mater and pia mater. The epidural space extends from 
the foramen magnum to the sacral hiatus and contains fat, lymphatics, 
blood vessels, and the spinal nerves as they leave the spinal cord. The 
epidural space separates the dura mater from the periosteum of the 
surrounding vertebral bodies. In children, the fat in the epidural space 
is not as dense as in adults, predisposing to greater spread of the local 
anesthetic from the site of injection.
Epidural local anesthetics block both sensory and sympathetic fibers, 
and if the local anesthetic is of sufficient concentration, they also block 
motor fibers. Mild hypotension may occur, although it is unusual in 
children <6 years of age. Epidural local anesthetics high in the thoracic 
spine may also anesthetize the sympathetic nerves to the heart (the car
-
diac accelerator fibers), producing bradycardia. In addition to using 
local anesthetics, it is routine to use opioids and sometimes 
α
- agonists 
as adjunctive medications in the epidural space. Clonidine and opioids 
have been well studied and shown not to be neurotoxic. Side effects 
of epidural opioid administration include delayed respiratory depres
-
sion, particularly when hydrophilic opioids such as morphine are used. 
The risk of this effect requires that children receiving epidural opioids 
by intermittent injection or continuous infusion be monitored by con
-
tinuous pulse oximetry and nursing observation, particularly during 
the first 24 hours of therapy or after significant dose escalations. Respi
-
ratory depression occurring after the first 24 hours of epidural opioid 
administration is distinctly unusual.
Epidural clonidine (an 
α
2
- agonist with 
μ
- opioid analgesic proper
-
ties) is associated with minimal risk and side effects. Although product 
labeling indicates use only in children with severe cancer pain, cloni
-
dine may be used for treatment of routine postoperative pain as well as 
pain syndromes such as CRPS. Mild sedation is the most common side 
effect of epidural clonidine, and it is not associated with respiratory 
depression.
Because performing epidural blockade is technical and may result 
in spinal cord injury, it is best done by an anesthesiologist or pain 
physician skilled in the technique. Caution is advised in the use of epi
-
dural anesthesia/analgesia for CRPS in children because no published 
RCTs	have	shown	these	procedures	superior	to	a	combination	of	less	
invasive physical and psychologic therapy, with or without neuropathic 
pain- focused medications.
 
INTRATHECAL ANALGESIA
Intrathecal catheters infused with opioids, clonidine, ziconotide 
(derived from a marine neurotoxin produced by the cone snail), and 
local anesthetics are occasionally applicable in pediatric patients with 
intractable pain from cancer or other life- threatening conditions. 
Typically,	intrathecal	catheters	are	attached	to	an	implanted	electronic	
pump containing a drug reservoir sufficient for several months of dos
-
ing. The technique is technical and best performed by an experienced 
pain management physician or neurosurgeon.
 
NERVE ABLATION AND DESTRUCTION
In some cases, pain remains refractory despite maximal reliance on oral 
and IV medications and nerve blockade. In these patients, temporary 
(pulsed radiofrequency ablation) or permanent neurolytic destruction 
(phenol or alcohol) of one or more nerves may be performed. The tech
-
niques should be carefully weighed against the consideration of perma
-
nent nerve destruction in a growing child with decades of life ahead. On 
the other hand, when pain is severe in life- limiting disease processes, 
the long- term considerations are less concerning, and these techniques 
should be discussed with a skilled pain management specialist.
 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR SPECIAL 
 
PEDIATRIC POPULATIONS
Pain Perception and Effects of Pain on 
 
Newborns and Infants
Pain may result from a number of circumstances in the newborn 
period, including acute pain (diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, 
minor surgery, monitoring), continuous pain (pain from thermal/
chemical burns, postsurgical and inflammatory pain), and chronic or 
disease- related pain (necrotizing enterocolitis, nerve injury, chronic 
conditions, thrombophlebitis). The most common sources of pain in 
healthy infants are acute procedures, such as heel lances, surgical pro
-
cedures, and in males, circumcision.
Many procedures are performed for premature infants in the neona
-
tal intensive care unit (NICU). In the first week of life, approximately 
94% of preterm infants <28 weeks gestational age are mechanically 
ventilated; in these situations, heelsticks and airway suctioning are fre
-
quent, yet few of these procedures are preceded by any type of analge
-
sia. Repeated handling and acute pain episodes sensitize the neonate 
to increased reactivity and stress responses to subsequent procedures. 
Typical	stress	responses	include	increases	in	heart	rate,	respiratory	rate,	
blood pressure, and intracranial pressure. Cardiac vagal tone, transcu
-
taneous oxygen saturation, carbon dioxide levels, and peripheral blood 
flow are decreased. Autonomic signs include changes in skin color, 
vomiting, gagging, hiccupping, diaphoresis, dilated pupils, and palmar 
and forehead sweating (see 
Table	93.4
).
Untreated pain in the newborn has serious short-  and long- term 
consequences. There has been a shift in most NICUs to more liberal 
use of opioids. Nonetheless, 
morphine
, the traditional gold standard 
of analgesia for acute pain, may not be effective and may have adverse 
long- term consequences. No differences have been found in the inci
-
dence of severe intraventricular hemorrhage or in the mortality rate 
when infants receiving morphine are compared with a placebo group, 
and there are no changes in assessed pain from tracheal suctioning in 
ventilated infants receiving morphine compared with those receiving 
a placebo infusion. Morphine may not alleviate acute pain in venti
-
lated preterm neonates, although there are few data on the effects of 
morphine and fentanyl in nonventilated newborns. The lack of opioid 
effects for acute pain in neonates may result from immaturity of opi
-
oid receptors; acute pain may cause the uncoupling of 
μ
- opioid recep
-
tors in the forebrain. Repetitive acute pain may create central neural 
changes in the newborn that may have long- term consequences for 
later pain vulnerability, cognitive effects, and opioid tolerance. Most 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
697
Table 93.19 
 
  World Health Organization Analgesic Ladder 
for Cancer Pain
STEP 1
Patients who present with mild to moderate pain should be treated 
with a nonopioid.
STEP 2
Patients who present with moderate to severe pain or for whom 
the step 1 regimen fails should be treated with an oral opioid for 
moderate pain combined with a nonopioid analgesic.
STEP 3
Patients who present with very severe pain or for whom the step 
2 regimen fails should be treated with an opioid used for severe 
pain, with or without a nonopioid analgesic.
neonatologists use opioids in painful situations. Sucrose and pacifiers 
are also being used in the NICU. The effects of 24% 
sucrose
 (Swee
-
tease) are believed to be opioid mediated because the effect can be 
reversed with naloxone. Sucrose, with or without a pacifier, may be 
effective for acute pain and stress control. Other nonpharmacologic 
strategies for stress and pain control include infant care by an indi
-
vidual primary nurse, tactile- kinesthetic stimuli (massage), “kangaroo 
care,” and soothing sensorial saturation.
 
Children With Cancer Pain
The World Health Organization (WHO) proposed an analgesic ther
-
apy model for cancer pain known as the 
analgesic ladder
 (
Table	93.19
). 
Designed to guide therapy in care systems with limited access to anal
-
gesic experts, this ladder consists of a hierarchy of oral pharmacologic 
interventions intended to treat pain of increasing magnitude. The hier
-
archy ignores modalities such as the use of nonconventional analgesics 
and interventional pain procedures, which physicians in developed 
countries are often able to prescribe. Nevertheless, because oral medi
-
cations are simple and efficacious, especially for home use, the ladder 
presents a framework for rationally using them, before applying other 
drugs and techniques of drug administration.
Oral medications are the first line of analgesic treatment. Because 
NSAIDs affect platelet adhesiveness, they are typically not used. As 
noted earlier, celecoxib may be the exception to this rule. Opioid ther
-
apy is the preferred approach for moderate or severe pain. Nonopioid 
analgesics are used for mild pain, a weak opioid is added for moderate 
pain, and strong opioids are administered for more severe pain. Adju
-
vant analgesics can be added, and side effects and comorbid symptoms 
are actively managed. Determining the type and sources of the pain 
will help develop an effective analgesic plan. Certain treatments, such 
as the chemotherapeutic agent vincristine, are associated with neuro
-
pathic	pain.	Such	pain	might	require	anticonvulsants	or	TCAs.	Stretch
-
ing pain from tumor growth within an organ might require strong 
opioids and/or radiation therapy if the tumor is radiosensitive. Organ 
obstruction, such as intestinal obstruction, should be diagnosed to 
relieve or bypass the obstruction.
It is important to consider both pharmacologic and nonpharmaco
-
logic	strategies	(e.g.,	CBT,	family/parent	support)	to	treat	pain	in	chil
-
dren with cancer.
 
Children with Pain Associated with Advanced 
Disease
Patients with advanced diseases, including cancer, acquired immu
-
nodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), neurodegenerative disorders, and 
cystic fibrosis, need palliative care approaches that focus on optimal 
quality of life. Nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic management 
of pain and other distressing symptoms is a key component. 
Palliative 
care
 should be offered to all children with serious diseases, whether 
or not the diseases are potentially curable or long life expectancy is 
predicted (see 
Chapter 8
). Examples include young children diag
-
nosed with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (>90% posttreatment life 
expectancy) and children undergoing organ transplantation. Pallia
-
tive care in pediatrics connotes treatment that focuses on symptom 
reduction, quality of life, and good family and clinical team commu
-
nication. It is not only for patients in hospice care or those at the end 
of life. Differences in the progression of underlying illness, associated 
distressing symptoms, and common emotional responses in these 
conditions should shape individual treatment plans. For end- of- life 
care, >90% of children and adolescents with cancer can be made 
comfortable by standard escalation of opioids according to the WHO 
protocol. A small subgroup (5%) requires enormous opioid dose esca
-
lation to >100 times the standard morphine or other opiate infusion 
rate. Most of these patients have spread of solid tumors to the spi
-
nal cord, roots, or plexus, and signs of neuropathic pain are evident. 
Methadone
 given orally is often used in palliative care, not only end- 
of- life care, because of its long half- life and its targets at both opioid 
and NMDA receptors.
The type of pain experienced by the patient (neuropathic, myofas
-
cial) should determine the need for adjunctive agents. Complementary 
measures, such as massage, hypnotherapy, and spiritual care, must also 
be offered in palliative care. Although the oral route of opioid admin
-
istration should be encouraged, especially to facilitate care at home, if 
possible,	some	children	are	unable	to	take	oral	opioids.	Transdermal	
and sublingual routes, as well as IV infusion with PCA, are likely next 
choices. Small, portable infusion pumps are convenient for home use. 
If venous access is limited, a useful alternative is to administer opi
-
oids (especially morphine or hydromorphone, but not methadone or 
meperidine) through continuous SC infusion, with or without a bolus 
option. A small (e.g., 22- gauge) cannula is placed under the skin and 
secured on the thorax, abdomen, or thigh. Sites may be changed every 
3- 7 days, as needed. As noted, alternative routes for opioids include the 
transdermal and oral transmucosal routes. These latter routes are pre
-
ferred over IV and SC drug delivery when the patient is being treated 
at home.
 
CHRONIC AND RECURRENT PAIN SYNDROMES
Chronic pain
 is defined as recurrent or persistent pain lasting longer 
than the normal tissue healing time (3- 6 months). Children may expe
-
rience pain related to injury (e.g., burns) or to a chronic or underlying 
disease process (e.g., cancer, arthritis), or pain can also be the chronic 
condition itself (e.g., CRPS, fibromyalgia, functional abdominal pain) 
(see 
Chapter 212
). During childhood, abdominal, musculoskeletal, and 
headache pain are the most frequently occurring conditions. However, 
definitions of chronic pain do not take into account standard criteria 
for assessing particular pain symptoms or for evaluating the inten
-
sity or impact of pain and therefore include individuals with varying 
symptoms and experiences. Consequently, in epidemiologic surveys, 
prevalence estimates vary widely. Overall prevalence rates for different 
childhood pains range from 4% to 88%. An average of 13.5–31.8% of 
adolescents in a community sample reported having weekly abdomi
-
nal, headache, or musculoskeletal pains. Most epidemiologic studies 
report prevalence and do not report the 
severity
 or impact of the pain. 
Research indicates that only a subset of children and adolescents with 
chronic pain (approximately 5%) experience moderate to severe dis
-
ability, and this likely better represents the estimated population for 
whom help is needed to treat pain and associated problems.
Neuropathic Pain Syndromes
Neuropathic pain is caused by abnormal excitability in the periph
-
eral or central nervous system that may persist after an injury heals 
or inflammation subsides. The pain, which can be acute or chronic, 
is typically described as burning or stabbing and may be associated 
with cutaneous hypersensitivity 
(allodynia)
, distortion of sensation 
(dysesthesia)
, and amplification of noxious sensations 
(hyperalgesia
 
and 
hyperpathia)
. Neuropathic pain conditions may be responsible 
for >35% of referrals to chronic pain clinics, conditions that typically 
include posttraumatic and postsurgical peripheral nerve injuries, 
phantom pain after amputation, pain after spinal cord injury, and pain 
caused by metabolic neuropathies (see 
Table	93.18
). Patients with neu
-
ropathic pain typically respond poorly to opioids. Evidence supports 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

698 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
the efficacy of antidepressants (nortriptyline, amitriptyline, venlafax
-
ine, duloxetine) and anticonvulsants (gabapentin, pregabalin, oxcar
-
bazepine) for treatment of neuropathic pain (see 
Table	93.16
).
Complex regional pain syndrome
 is well described in the pediat
-
ric population (see 
Chapter 211
 and 
Table	93.17
). 
CRPS type 1
 is a 
syndrome of neuropathic pain that typically follows an antecedent and 
usually minor injury or surgery to an extremity without identifiable 
nerve injury. It is seen after injury such as sprain or fracture or even 
in instances as minimal as an IV start. The syndrome of CRPS type 1 
includes severe spontaneous neuropathic pain, hyperpathia, hyperal
-
gesia, severe cutaneous allodynia to touch and cold, changes in blood 
flow (typically extremity cyanosis), and increased sweating. In more 
advanced cases, symptoms include dystrophic changes of the hair, 
nails, and skin; immobility of the extremity (dystonia); and muscle 
atrophy. In the most advanced cases, symptoms include ankylosis of 
the joints of the extremity. Specific causal factors in CRPS type 1 in 
both children and adults remain elusive, although coincidental events 
may be noted. 
CRPS type 2
 clinically appears the same with respect to 
symptoms but is associated with a known nerve injury.
Treatment	of	CRPS	in	children	has	been	extrapolated	from	that	in	
adults,	with	some	evidence	for	efficacy	of	physical	therapy,	CBT,	nerve	
blocks, antidepressants, AEDs, and other related drugs. All experts in 
pediatric pain management agree on the value of aggressive physical 
therapy, including desensitization. Some centers provide aggressive 
therapy without the use of pharmacologic agents or interventional 
nerve blocks. Unfortunately, recurrent episodes of CRPS may be seen 
in up to 25–50% of patients, particularly adolescent females. Physical 
therapy can be extraordinarily painful for children to endure; it is tol
-
erated only by the most stoic and motivated patients. If children have 
difficulty enduring the pain, there is a well- established role for pharma
-
cologic agents, with or without peripheral or central neuraxial nerve 
blocks, to render the affected limb sufficiently analgesic so that physical 
therapy can be tolerated. Pharmacologic interventions include the use 
of	AEDs	such	as	gabapentin	and/or	TCAs	such	as	amitriptyline	(see	
Fig. 93.4
). Although there is clear evidence of a peripheral inflamma
-
tory component of CRPS, with release of cytokines and other inflam
-
matory mediators from the peripheral nervous system in the affected 
limb, the use of antiinflammatory agents has been disappointing. Com
-
mon nerve block techniques include IV regional anesthetics, epidural 
analgesia, and peripheral nerve blocks. In extreme and refractory cases, 
more invasive strategies have been reported, including surgical sympa
-
thectomy and spinal cord stimulation, although these are not generally 
recommended in the pediatric population
Although an array of treatments has some benefit, the mainstay 
of treatment remains 
physical therapy
 emphasizing desensitization, 
strengthening, and functional improvement. Additionally, pharmaco
-
logic agents and psychologic and complementary therapies are impor
-
tant components of a treatment plan. Invasive techniques, although 
not curative, can be helpful if they permit the performance of frequent 
and aggressive physical therapy that cannot be carried out otherwise. 
A good biopsychosocial evaluation will help determine the orientation 
of the treatment components. There are insufficient data to indicate the 
superior value of interventional blocks, such as epidural anesthesia, in 
children with CRPS over physical and psychologic interventions, with 
or without pharmacologic support.
 
Myofascial Pain Disorders and Fibromyalgia
Myofascial pain disorders are associated with tender points in the 
affected	muscles	and	with	muscle	spasms	(tight	muscles).	Treatment	
is targeted at relaxing the affected muscles through physical therapy, 
Iyengar yoga, massage, and acupuncture. Rarely are pharmacologic 
muscle relaxants helpful other than for creating tiredness at night for 
sleep. Dry needling or injections of local anesthetic into the tender 
points has been advocated, but the data do not support this as a stan
-
dard treatment. Similarly, although botulinum toxin injections may 
be used, no data support this practice in children. Often, poor body 
postures, repetitive use of a body part not accustomed to that move
-
ment, or carrying heavy backpacks initiates pain. When it becomes 
widespread, a diagnosis may be made of 
juvenile fibromyalgia
, which 
may or may not continue to subsequently become adult fibromyalgia. 
Newer guidelines do not use “tender points” in the diagnosis of fibro
-
myalgia. Instead, diagnosis relies on a model that assesses for wide
-
spread pain and symptom severity (see 
Chapter 211
). Likely there are 
different subtypes of widespread pain syndromes, and physical therapy 
is a key component of treatment. Psychologic interventions may play 
an important role to assist the child in resuming normal activities and 
to manage any psychologic comorbidities. Any pain rehabilitation plan 
should enhance return to full function. Because there is a high inci
-
dence of chronic pain in parents of children presenting with a chronic 
pain condition, especially fibromyalgia, attention to parent and family 
Table 93.20 
 
  Clinical Features of Human Disorders Caused by Pathologic Variants in Ion- Channel Genes That Lead to Altered 
Pain Perception and Are Inherited in a Mendelian Manner
AFFECTED GENE 
(PROTEIN)
TYPE AND EFFECT OF 
MUTATION
MAIN PHENOTYPE
ADDITIONAL 
FEATURES
Inherited erythromelalgia
SCN9A
 (Na
v
1.7)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset by age 20 yr; episodic pain 
triggered by warmth; feet affected more 
frequently than hands
Erythema of feet
Paroxysmal extreme pain 
disorder
SCN9A
 (Na
v
1.7)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset at birth; episodic pain; sacral 
region is affected most frequently, face 
is affected more often than the limbs; 
physical triggers include defecation
Erythema of the 
sacrum; tonic 
attacks
Small fiber neuropathy
SCN9A
 (Na
v
1.7)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset at any age but more common in 
early adulthood; persistent burning pain; 
feet affected more frequently than hands
Could be 
autonomic 
features
Small fiber neuropathy
SCN10A
 (Na
v
1.8)
Heterozygous, activating
Persistent burning pain
Could be autonomic 
features
Familial episodic pain 
syndrome type I
TRPA1
 (TRPA1)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset at birth or in infancy; episodic chest 
or arm pain; triggers are hunger and cold
—
Familial episodic pain 
syndrome type III
SCN11A
 (Na
v
1.9)
Heterozygous, activating
Onset in first decade; episodic hand and 
foot pain; triggers are intercurrent illness 
or exercise
—
Na
v
, Sodium ion channel.
Modified from Bennett DLH, Woods CG. Painful and painless channelopathies. 
Lancet Neurol
. 2014;13:587–599, 
Table 1
, p. 590.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 93
 u 
Pediatric Pain Management 
699
factors is important. Parent training may entail teaching the parent to 
model more appropriate pain coping behaviors and to recognize the 
child’s independent attempts to manage pain and function adaptively. 
Parents may also need referrals to obtain appropriate pain manage
-
ment for their own pain condition.
Pregabalin and duloxetine are FDA approved for management of 
fibromyalgia in adults; duloxetine is also approved for adolescents ages 
13- 17. However, the best evidence for the treatment of adolescents 
with	fibromyalgia	remains	a	multimodal	approach	including	CBT	and	
physical therapy. This is generally considered superior to solitary use of 
pharmacologic agents.
 
Erythromelalgia
Erythromelalgia in children is generally primary, whereas in adults it 
may be either primary or secondary to malignancy or other hemato
-
logic disorders, such as polycythemia vera (see 
Chapter 211.5
). Patients 
with erythromelalgia exhibit red, warm, hyperperfused distal limbs. 
The disorder is usually bilateral and may involve either or both the 
hands and feet. Patients perceive burning pain and typically seek relief 
by immersing the affected extremities in ice water, sometimes so often 
and for so long so that skin pathology results. 
Primary erythrome
-
lalgia
 is caused by a gain of function pathogenic variant (autosomal 
dominant) in the gene for the NaV1.7 neuronal sodium channel on 
peripheral C nociceptive fibers, resulting in their spontaneous depolar
-
ization, and thus continuous burning pain. The most common patho
-
genic variant identified is in the 
SCN9A
 gene, although there are several 
variants that affect the NaV1.7 channel (
Table	93.20
). Other ion chan
-
nel pathologic gene variants are associated with rare pain syndromes 
(see 
Table	93.20
). Another pathogenic variant (loss of function) in the 
NaV1.7 channel results in a rare but serious genetic condition, the con
-
genital indifference to pain.
Although some similarities to CRPS may be present in erythrome
-
lalgia, there are differences to distinguish the two conditions. CRPS in 
general is a unilateral phenomenon rather than bilateral. CRPS often 
presents with a cold, cyanotic limb (although “hot” CRPS with a warm, 
erythematous limb may occur as well). In addition, erythromelalgia 
is associated with intermittent pain compared with the more continu
-
ous nature and symptoms seen in CRPS. In erythromelalgia, ice water 
immersion is analgesic, the condition is bilateral and symmetric, and it 
is associated with hyperperfusion of the distal extremity.
The evaluation of hyperperfused limbs with burning pain should 
include genetic testing for 
Fabry disease (alpha- galactosidase defi
-
ciency)
 and screening for hematologic malignancies, with diagno
-
sis of primary erythromelalgia being one of exclusion. The definitive 
treatment of Fabry disease includes enzyme replacement (as disease- 
modifying treatment) and administration of neuropathic pain medica
-
tions such as gabapentin, although the success of antineuropathic pain 
drugs in small fiber neuropathies has not been impressive. The treat
-
ment of erythromelalgia is much more difficult. Antineuropathic pain 
medications	(AEDs,	TCAs)	are	typically	prescribed	but	rarely	helpful	
(see 
Fig. 93.4
). Although one might predict that sodium channel–block
-
ing AEDs might be effective in this sodium channelopathy, oxcarbaze
-
pine has not proved to be a particularly effective modality. The pain 
responds well to regional anesthetic nerve blocks, but it returns imme
-
diately when the effects of the nerve block resolve. In contrast, in other 
neuropathic syndromes, the analgesia usually (and inexplicably) per
-
sists well after the resolution of the pharmacologic nerve block. Aspirin 
and even nitroprusside infusions have been anecdotally reported to be 
of benefit with secondary erythromelalgia but have not been reported 
to be helpful in children with primary erythromelalgia. Case reports in 
adults and clinical experience in children suggest that periodic treat
-
ment with high- dose 
capsaicin cream (8%)
 may be effective in alle
-
viating the burning pain and disability of erythromelalgia. Capsaicin 
(essence	of	chili	pepper)	cream	is	a	vanilloid	receptor	(TRPV1)	agonist	
that depletes small fiber peripheral nerve endings of the neurotrans
-
mitter substance P, an important neurotransmitter in the generation 
and transmission of nociceptive impulses. Once depleted, these nerve 
endings are no longer capable of generating spontaneous pain until the 
receptors regenerate, a process that takes many months.
 
Other Chronic Pain Conditions in Children
A variety of genetic and other medical/surgical conditions are often 
associated with chronic pain. Examples include Fabry disease, Chiari 
malformation/
syringomyelia, epidermolysis bullosa, juvenile idio
-
pathic arthritis, porphyria, mitochondrial disorders, degenerative 
neurologic diseases, cerebral palsy, ASD, intestinal pseudoobstruction, 
inflammatory bowel disease, chronic migraine/daily headaches, and 
irritable bowel disease. In many cases, treating the underlying disease, 
such as with enzyme replacement in Fabry disease and in other lyso
-
somal disorders, will reduce what otherwise might be progression of 
symptoms but may not totally reduce pain and suffering, and other 
modalities will be needed. Pain that persists and is not well treated can 
lead to central sensitization and widespread pain, such as seen in chil
-
dren with one pain source who then develop fibromyalgia.
 
MANAGING COMPLEX CHRONIC PAIN PROBLEMS
Some patients with chronic pain have a prolonged course of evalu
-
ation in attempts to find what is expected as the singular “cause” of 
the pain and thus also undergo many failed treatments (see 
Chapter 
212
). Parents worry that the doctors have not yet discovered the cause 
that may be serious and life threatening, and children often feel not 
believed, that others perceive they are faking their pain or are “crazy.” 
There may be no identifiable or diagnosable condition, and families 
may seek opinions from multiple treatment facilities to find help for 
their suffering child. For some children, what may have begun as an 
acute injury or infectious event may result in a chronic pain syndrome, 
with changes in the neurobiology of the pain- signaling system.
In the context of disabling chronic pain, it is very important for 
the pediatrician to avoid overmedication, because this can exacerbate 
associated disability. In addition, it is important to maintain an open 
mind and reassess the diagnosis if the clinical presentation changes. It 
is essential to communicate to the family that pain has a biologic basis 
(likely related to neural signaling and neurotransmitter dysregulation) 
and that the pain is naturally distressing to the child and family. All 
patients and families should receive a simple explanation of pain phys
-
iology that helps them understand the importance of (1) functional 
rehabilitation to normalize pain signaling, (2) the low risk of causing 
further injury with systematic increases in normal functioning, and (3) 
the likely failure of treatment if pain is managed as if it were acute. 
Because it is counterintuitive for most people to move a part of the 
body that hurts, many patients with chronic pain have atrophy or con
-
tractures of a painful extremity from disuse. Associated increases in 
worry and anxiety may exacerbate pain and leave the body even more 
vulnerable to further illness, injury, and disability.
Pain can have a significant impact on many areas of normal func
-
tioning and routines for children, and school absenteeism and related 
consequences of missed schooling are often significant problems. 
Appropriate assessment and evaluation of the child with chronic pain 
and the family is the critical first step in developing a treatment plan. 
For example, a high–academically functioning child might have an 
acute injury that leads to chronic pain and significant school absen
-
teeism. Although many downstream contributors to pain and dis
-
ability maintenance can accumulate the more school that is missed, 
often previously unrecognized focal learning disabilities may become 
the increasing trigger for a downhill cascade of pain, disability, and 
school absenteeism. Even for the child with outstanding grades, it may 
be helpful to learn about the amount of time spent on each subject. 
As certain subjects become more complicated, such as math, the child 
with a previously unrecognized math learning disability may be spend
-
ing hours on math homework each night, even with good grades in 
math. In this case, the acute illness or injury becomes the “final straw” 
that breaks down the child’s coping and turns the acute pain into a 
chronic problem.
Interdisciplinary pediatric pain programs
 have become the stan
-
dard of care for treating complex chronic pain problems in youth. 
Although available in many parts of the United States, Canada, Europe, 
Australia, and New Zealand, the overall number of programs is still 
small. Therefore many children and adolescents with chronic pain will 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

700 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
be unable to receive specialized pain treatment in their local communi
-
ties. In recognition of the severity and complexity of pain and disability 
for some children, different settings and treatment delivery models for 
providing pain care have been explored. One option is inpatient and day 
hospital treatment programs, which often address barriers to access to 
outpatient treatment and coordination of care. In addition, these pro
-
grams provide an intensive treatment option for children who do not 
make adequate progress in outpatient treatment or who are severely dis
-
abled by pain. Early programs developed in the 1990s focused on CRPS 
treatment through intensive inpatient rehabilitation and exercise- based 
programs. Later programs expanded to other clinical populations and 
broadened the treatment focus to incorporate a range of rehabilitation 
and psychologic therapies delivered both individually and in groups. 
The typical length of inpatient admissions for children with chronic pain 
in such programs is 3- 4 weeks, and emerging evidence suggests benefit 
from these programs. A major problem that limits such care for children 
with complex chronic disabling pain is the long waiting list for entry into 
these programs, as well as obtaining financial coverage for the treatment. 
Additional, more widespread models of care are needed.
Another intervention delivery option is 
remote management,
 refer
-
ring to pain interventions used outside the clinic/hospital setting to 
reach children in their homes or communities. Interventions are typi
-
cally delivered using some form of technology, such as the internet, 
or may rely on other media, such as telephone counseling or written 
self-	help	materials.	Typically,	remote	management	of	pain	includes	
monitoring,	counseling,	and	delivery	of	behavioral	and	CBT	interven
-
tions. Internet interventions have received the most research attention 
to date, with published examples of several different pediatric chronic 
pain conditions with promising findings for pain reduction. 
Telemedi
-
cine
 may offer additional ways to connect experts in pediatric pain with 
patients in remote communities. Within any community, the pediatri
-
cian will need to locate appropriate referral sources for patients with 
complex chronic pain. However, although psychologic interventions 
can be delivered through these telemedicine strategies, the pediatri
-
cian is still relied on to obtain the needed biopsychosocial history, 
complete a thorough physical examination, and provide the pharma
-
cologic management as needed. The pediatrician also communicates 
with the family to help the child and family understand the pain and 
how the different pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatments 
will enhance function and alter the long- term neural processes under
-
lying pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography
Poisoning is the leading cause of injury- related death in the United 
States, surpassing that from motor vehicle crashes. Most of these 
deaths are unintentional (i.e., not suicide). In adolescents, poisoning 
is the second leading cause of injury- related death. Of the more than 2 
million human poisoning exposures reported annually to the National 
Poison Data System (NPDS) of the American Association of Poison 
Control Centers (AAPCC), approximately 50% occur in children <6 
years old, with the highest number of exposures occurring in 1-  and 
2- year- olds. Almost all these exposures are unintentional and reflect 
the propensity for young children to put virtually anything in their 
mouth. Fortunately, children <6 years old account for <2% of all poi
-
soning fatalities reported to NPDS.
Chapter 
94
Poisoning
Jillian L. Theobald and Justin N. Corcoran
More than 90% of toxic exposures in children occur in the home, 
and most involve a single substance. Ingestion accounts for the major
-
ity of exposures, with a minority occurring by the dermal, inhalational, 
and ophthalmic routes. Approximately 40% of cases involve nondrug 
substances, such as cosmetics, personal care items, cleaning solutions, 
plants, and foreign bodies. Pharmaceutical preparations account for 
the remainder of exposures, and analgesics, topical preparations, vita
-
mins, and antihistamines are most commonly reported.
The majority of poisoning exposures in children <6 years old can 
be managed without direct medical intervention beyond a call to 
the regional 
poison control center (PCC)
. This is because the prod
-
uct involved is not inherently toxic or the quantity of the material 
is not sufficient to produce clinically relevant toxic effects. How
-
ever, a number of substances can be highly toxic to toddlers in small 
doses (
Table	94.1
). In 2019, carbon monoxide (CO), batteries, and 
analgesics (mainly opioids) were the leading identifiable causes of 
poison- related fatalities in young children (<6 years). In addition, 
anesthetics, antihistamines, chemicals, cough and cold preparations, 
tobacco/nicotine/e- cigarette products, and hydrocarbons were sig
-
nificant causes of mortality.
Poison prevention education should be an integral part of all well- 
child visits, starting at the 6- month visit. Counseling parents and other 
caregivers about potential poisoning risks, poison- proofing a child’s 
environment, and actions in the event of an ingestion diminish the like
-
lihood of serious morbidity or mortality. Poison prevention education 
materials are available from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) 
and regional PCCs. Through a U.S. network of PCCs, anyone at any 
time can contact a regional poison center by calling the toll- free number 
1- 800- 222- 1222
. Parents should be encouraged to share this number 
with grandparents, relatives, babysitters, and any other caregivers.
Product safety measures, poison prevention education, early recog
-
nition of exposures, and around- the- clock access to regionally based 
PCCs all contribute to the favorable exposure outcomes in young 
children. Poisoning exposures in children 6- 12 years are much less 
common, involving only approximately 10% of all reported pediatric 
exposures. A second peak in pediatric exposures occurs in adoles
-
cence. Exposures in the adolescent age- group are primarily intentional 
(suicide or abuse or misuse of substances) and thus often result in 
more severe toxicity (see 
Chapter 157
). Families should be informed 
and given anticipatory guidance that nonprescription and prescription 
medications, and even household products (e.g., inhalants), are com
-
mon sources of adolescent exposures. Although adolescents (age 13- 19 
years) account for only about 16% of pediatric exposures, they con
-
stitute a larger proportion of deaths. Of the 159 poison- related pedi
-
atric deaths in 2021 reported to NPDS, 86 were adolescents (2% of all 
fatalities called in to poison centers). Pediatricians should be aware of 
the signs of drug abuse or suicidal ideation in adolescents and should 
aggressively intervene (see 
Chapter 40
).
PREVENTION
Deaths caused by unintentional poisoning among younger children 
have decreased dramatically over the past 2 decades, particularly 
among children <5 years old. In 1970, when the U.S. Poison Packag
-
ing Prevention Act was passed, 226 poisoning deaths of children <5 
years old occurred, compared with only 25 in 2021. Poisoning preven
-
tion demonstrates the effectiveness of passive strategies, including the 
use of child- resistant packaging and limited doses per container. Dif
-
ficulty using child- resistant containers by adults is an important cause 
of poisoning in young children today. In 18.5% of households in which 
poisoning occurred in children <5 years old, the child- resistant closure 
was replaced, and 65% of the packaging used did not work properly. 
Almost 20% of ingestions occur from drugs belonging to grandparents, 
who have difficulty using traditional child- resistant containers and 
often put their medications in pill organizers that are not childproof.
Even though there has been success in preventing poisoning in 
young children, there has been a remarkable rise in adolescent poison- 
related death over the past 20 years. This has mirrored the increasing 
rate of antidepressant prescriptions written by healthcare providers 
and the epidemic increase in opioid- related fatalities.
 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
701
Table 94.1 
 
  Common Agents Potentially Toxic to Young 
Children (<6 yr) in Small Doses
*
SUBSTANCE
TOXICITY
Aliphatic hydrocarbons (e.g., 
gasoline, kerosene, lamp oil)
Acute lung injury
Antimalarials (chloroquine, 
quinine)
Seizures, dysrhythmias
Benzocaine
Methemoglobinemia
β
- Adrenergic receptor blockers
†
Bradycardia, hypotension
Calcium channel blockers
Bradycardia, hypotension, 
 
hyperglycemia
Camphor
Seizures
Caustics	(pH	<2	or	>12)
Airway, esophageal and gastric 
burns
Clonidine
Lethargy, bradycardia, 
 
hypotension
Diphenoxylate and atropine 
(Lomotil)
CNS depression, respiratory 
depression
Ethylene glycol
Altered mental status, seizures
Hypoglycemics, oral 
(sulfonylureas and meglitinides)
Hypoglycemia, seizures
Imidazolines (oxymetazoline, 
tetrahydrozoline)
CNS depression, respiratory 
depression
Laundry detergent packets 
(pods)
Airway issues, respiratory distress, 
altered mental status
Lindane
Seizures
Marijuana (cannabis, THC)
Lethargy, seizures, coma
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Hypertension followed by delayed 
cardiovascular collapse
Methyl salicylate
Tachypnea, metabolic acidosis, 
seizures
Opioids (especially methadone, 
buprenorphine)
CNS depression, respiratory 
depression
Organophosphate pesticides
Cholinergic crisis
Phenothiazines (especially 
chlorpromazine, thioridazine)
Seizures, dysrhythmias
Sulfonylureas (glipizide, 
glyburide)
Hypoglycemia
Theophylline
Seizures, dysrhythmias
Tricyclic antidepressants
CNS depression, seizures, 
 
dysrhythmias, hypotension
*“Small dose” typically implies one to two pills or 5 mL.
†
Lipid- soluble 
β
 blockers (e.g., propranolol) are more toxic than water- soluble 
β
 
blockers (e.g., atenolol).
CNS, Central nervous system.
APPROACH TO THE POISONED PATIENT
The initial approach to the patient with a witnessed or suspected poi
-
soning should be no different than that in any other sick child, start
-
ing with stabilization and rapid assessment of the airway, breathing, 
circulation (pulse, blood pressure), and mental state. In any patient 
with altered mental status, a serum glucose concentration should be 
obtained early, and naloxone administration should be considered if 
there is coma or respiratory depression. A targeted history and physi
-
cal examination serve as the foundation for a thoughtful differential 
diagnosis, which can then be further refined through laboratory testing 
and other diagnostic studies.
History
Obtaining an accurate problem- oriented history is of paramount impor
-
tance. 
Intentional
 poisonings (suicide attempts, drug abuse/misuse) are 
typically more severe than unintentional, exploratory ingestions. In 
patients without a witnessed exposure, historical features such as age 
of the child (toddler or adolescent), acute onset of symptoms without 
prodrome, multisystem organ dysfunction, or high levels of household 
stress should suggest a possible diagnosis of poisoning. In patients with 
a witnessed exposure, determining exactly what the child was exposed 
to and the circumstances surrounding the exposure is crucial to initiat
-
ing directed therapy quickly. For household and workplace products, 
names (brand, generic, chemical) and specific ingredients, along with 
their concentrations, can often be obtained from the labels. PCC spe
-
cialists can also help to identify possible ingredients and review the 
potential toxicities of each component. Poison center specialists can 
also help identify pills based on markings, shape, and color. If referred 
to the hospital for evaluation, parents should be instructed to bring the 
products, pills, and/or containers with them to assist with identifying 
and quantifying the exposure. If a child is found with an unknown pill, 
a list of all medications in the child’s environment, including medica
-
tions that grandparents, parents, siblings, caregivers, or other visitors 
might have brought into the house, must be obtained. In the case of an 
unknown exposure, clarifying where the child was found (e.g., garage, 
kitchen, laundry room, bathroom, backyard, workplace) can help to 
generate a list of potential toxins.
Next, it is important to clarify the 
timing
 of the ingestion and to 
obtain some estimate of how much of the substance may have been 
ingested. It is better to overestimate the amount ingested to prepare 
for the worst- case scenario. Counting pills or measuring the remaining 
volume of a liquid ingested can sometimes be useful in generating esti
-
mates. For inhalational, ocular, or dermal exposures, the concentration 
of the agent and the length of contact time with the material should be 
determined, if possible.
Symptoms
Obtaining a description of symptoms experienced after ingestion, 
including their timing of onset relative to the time of ingestion and 
their progression, can generate a list of potential toxins and help antici
-
pate the severity of the ingestion. Coupled with physical exam findings, 
reported symptoms assist practitioners in identifying 
toxidromes
, or 
recognized poisoning syndromes, suggestive of toxicity from specific 
substances or classes of substances (
Tables	94.2	to	94.5
).
 
    
Underlying diseases can make a child more susceptible to the effects 
of a toxin. Concurrent drug therapy can also increase toxicity because 
certain drugs may interact with the toxin. A history of psychiatric ill
-
ness can make patients more prone to substance abuse, misuse, inten
-
tional ingestions, and polypharmacy complications. Pregnancy is a 
common precipitating factor in adolescent suicide attempts and can 
influence both evaluation of the patient and subsequent treatment. A 
developmental history is important to ensure that the exposure history 
provided is appropriate for the child’s developmental stage (e.g., report 
of 6- month- old picking up a large container of laundry detergent and 
drinking it should indicate a “red flag”).
 
 
Understanding the child’s social environment helps to identify poten
-
tial sources of exposure (caregivers, visitors, grandparents, recent par
-
ties or social gatherings) and social circumstances (new baby, parent’s 
illness, financial stress) that might have contributed to the ingestion 
(suicide or unintentional). Unfortunately, some poisonings occur in 
the setting of serious neglect or intentional abuse.
 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

702 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 94.2 
 
  Selected Historical and Physical Findings in Poisoning
SIGN
TOXIN
ODOR
Bitter almonds
Cyanide
Acetone
Isopropyl alcohol, methanol, paraldehyde, salicylates
Rotten eggs
Hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, methyl mercaptans (additive to natural gas)
Wintergreen
Methyl salicylate
Garlic
Arsenic, thallium, organophosphates, selenium
Mothballs
Camphor, naphthalene
Freshly mowed hay
Phosgene
Carrots
Water hemlock
Gasoline
Petroleum distillates
OCULAR SIGNS
Miosis
Opioids (except propoxyphene, meperidine, and pentazocine), organophosphates and other cholinergics, 
clonidine, phenothiazines (typical antipsychotics), sedative- hypnotics, olanzapine
Mydriasis
Anticholinergics (e.g., antihistamines, TCAs, atropine), sympathomimetics (cocaine, amphetamines, PCP), 
post–anoxic encephalopathy, opiate withdrawal, cathinones, MDMA
Nystagmus
Anticonvulsants, sedative- hypnotics, alcohols, PCP, ketamine, dextromethorphan
Lacrimation
Organophosphates, irritant gas or vapors
Retinal hyperemia
Methanol
CUTANEOUS SIGNS
Diaphoresis
Cholinergics (organophosphates), sympathomimetics, salicylates, phencyclidine (PCP), withdrawal 
 
syndromes
Alopecia
Thallium, arsenic
Erythema
Boric acid, elemental mercury, cyanide, carbon monoxide, disulfiram, scombroid, anticholinergics, 
 
vancomycin
Cyanosis (unresponsive to oxygen)
Methemoglobinemia (e.g., benzocaine, dapsone, nitrites, phenazopyridine), amiodarone, silver
Bullae/blisters
Barbiturates, mustard gas, xylazine, snake, spiders
ORAL SIGNS
Salivation
Organophosphates, salicylates, corrosives, ketamine, PCP, strychnine
Oral burns
Corrosives, oxalate- containing plants
Gum lines
Lead, mercury, arsenic, bismuth
GASTROINTESTINAL SIGNS
Diarrhea
Antimicrobials, arsenic, iron, boric acid, cholinergics, colchicine, opioid withdrawal
Hematemesis
Arsenic, iron, caustics, NSAIDs, salicylates
Constipation
Lead
CARDIAC SIGNS
Tachycardia
Sympathomimetics, anticholinergics, antidepressants, antipsychotics, methylxanthines (theophylline, 
caffeine), salicylates, cellular asphyxiants (cyanide, carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide), withdrawal 
(ethanol, sedatives, clonidine, opioids), serotonin syndrome, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, MDMA, 
cathinones
Bradycardia
β
 Blockers, calcium channel blockers, digoxin, clonidine, organophosphates, opioids, sedative- hypnotics 
xylazine
Hypertension
Sympathomimetics, anticholinergics, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, serotonin syndrome, nicotine, 
 
caffeine, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, clonidine withdrawal
Hypotension
β
 Blockers, calcium channel blockers, cyclic antidepressants, iron, antipsychotics, barbiturates, clonidine, 
opioids, arsenic, amatoxin mushrooms, cellular asphyxiants (cyanide, carbon monoxide, hydrogen 
sulfide), snake envenomation, xylazine
RESPIRATORY SIGNS
Depressed respirations
Opioids, sedative- hypnotics, alcohol, clonidine, marijuana, barbiturates, xylazine
Tachypnea
Salicylates, sympathomimetics, caffeine, metabolic acidosis, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon aspiration
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM SIGNS
Ataxia
Alcohols, anticonvulsants, sedative- hypnotics, lithium, dextromethorphan, carbon monoxide, inhalants
Coma
Opioids, sedative- hypnotics, anticonvulsants, antidepressants, antipsychotics, ethanol, anticholinergics, 
clonidine, GHB, alcohols, salicylates, barbiturates, hypoglycemics, lead, arsenic, rohypnol, carbon 
monoxide
Seizures
Sympathomimetics, anticholinergics, antidepressants (especially TCAs, bupropion, venlafaxine), 
cholinergics (organophosphates), isoniazid, camphor, lindane, salicylates, lead, nicotine, tramadol, 
water hemlock, withdrawal (especially ethanol), strychnine, cocaine
Delirium/psychosis
Sympathomimetics, anticholinergics, LSD, PCP, hallucinogens, lithium, dextromethorphan, steroids, 
withdrawal, MDMA, cathinones
Peripheral neuropathy
Lead, arsenic, mercury, organophosphates, nicotine
Hypothermia
Carbon monoxide, opioids, oral hypoglycemics, liquor, sedative- hypnotics
Hyperthermia
Antihistamines, amphetamines, salicylates, antidepressants (TCAs), antipsychotics, serotonin syndrome, 
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, withdrawal (alcohol, baclofen)
GHB, 
γ
- Hydroxybutyrate; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; MDMA, 3,4- methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy); NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; PCP, phencyclidine; 
TCAs, tricyclic antidepressants.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
703
Table 94.3 
 
  Recognizable Poison Syndromes (“Toxidromes”)
TOXIDROME
SIGNS
POSSIBLE TOXINS
VITAL SIGNS
MENTAL STATUS
PUPILS
SKIN
BOWEL SOUNDS
OTHER
Sympathomimetic
Hypertension, 
 
tachycardia, 
 
hyperthermia
Agitation, psychosis, 
delirium, violence
Dilated
Diaphoretic, 
flushed
Normal to increased
Amphetamines, cocaine, PCP, bath salts 
(cathinones), ADHD medication
Anticholinergic
Hypertension, 
 
tachycardia, 
 
hyperthermia
Agitated, delirium, 
coma, seizures
Dilated
Dry, hot, 
flushed
Diminished
Ileus, urinary 
retention
Antihistamines, TCAs, atropine, 
 
jimsonweed
Cholinergic
Bradycardia, BP and 
temp typically normal
Confusion, coma, 
fasciculations
Small
Diaphoretic
Hyperactive
Diarrhea, urination, 
bronchorrhea, 
bronchospasm, 
emesis, lacrimation, 
salivation
Organophosphates (insecticides, nerve 
agents), carbamates (physostigmine, 
neostigmine, pyridostigmine) 
Alzheimer medications, myasthenia 
treatments
Opioids
Respiratory depression, 
bradycardia, 
hypotension, 
hypothermia
Depression, coma, 
euphoria
Pinpoint
Normal
Normal to 
 
decreased
Methadone, buprenorphine, morphine, 
oxycodone, heroin, etc.
Sedative- 
hypnotics
Respiratory 
 
depression, HR 
 
normal to decreased, 
BP normal to 
 
decreased, temp 
 
normal to decreased
Somnolence, coma
Small or 
normal
Normal
Normal
Barbiturates, benzodiazepines, ethanol 
xylazine
Serotonin 
syndrome 
(similar findings 
with neuroleptic 
malignant 
syndrome)
Hyperthermia, 
tachycardia, 
hypertension 
or hypotension 
(autonomic instability)
Agitation, confusion, 
coma
Dilated
Diaphoretic
Increased
Neuromuscular 
hyperexcitability: 
clonus, 
hyperreflexia 
(lower	>	upper	
extremities)
SSRIs, lithium, MAOIs, linezolid, tramadol, 
meperidine, dextromethorphan
Salicylates
Tachypnea, hyperpnea, 
tachycardia, 
 
hyperthermia
Agitation, confusion, 
coma
Normal
Diaphoretic
Normal
Nausea, vomiting, 
tinnitus, ABGs with 
primary respiratory 
alkalosis and primary 
metabolic acidosis; 
tinnitus or difficulty 
hearing
Aspirin and aspirin- containing products, 
methyl salicylate
Withdrawal 
(sedative- 
hypnotic)
Tachycardia, tachypnea, 
hyperthermia
Agitation, 
tremor, seizure, 
hallucinosis, 
delirium tremens
Dilated
Diaphoretic
Increased
Lack of access to ethanol, 
benzodiazepines, barbiturates, GHB, 
or excessive use of flumazenil
Withdrawal 
(opioid)
Tachycardia
Restlessness, anxiety
Dilated
Diaphoretic
Hyperactive
Nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea
Lack of access to opioids or excessive 
use of naloxone
ABGs, Arterial blood gases; ADHD, attention- deficit/hyperactivity disorder; BP, blood pressure; GHB, 
γ
- hydroxybutyrate; HR, heart rate; MAOIs, monoamine oxidase inhibitors; PCP, phencyclidine; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors; temp, temperature; TCAs, tricyclic antidepressants.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

704 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 94.4 
 
  Mini- Toxidromes
TOXIDROME
SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS
EXAMPLES
α
1
- Adrenergic receptor antagonists
CNS depression, tachycardia, miosis
Chlorpromazine, quetiapine, clozapine, olanzapine, 
risperidone
α
2
- Adrenergic receptor agonist
CNS depression, bradycardia, hypertension 
(early), hypotension (late), miosis
Clonidine, oxymetazoline, tetrahydrozoline, 
 
tizanidine, dexmedetomidine
Clonus/myoclonus
CNS depression, myoclonic jerks, clonus, 
hyperreflexia
Carisoprodol, lithium, serotonergic agents, bismuth, 
organic lead, organic mercury, serotonin or 
 
neuroleptic malignant syndrome
Sodium channel blockers
CNS toxicity, wide QRS
Cyclic antidepressants and structurally related agents, 
propoxyphene, quinidine/quinine, amantadine, 
antihistamines, bupropion, cocaine
Potassium channel blockers
CNS toxicity, long QT interval
Antipsychotics, methadone, phenothiazines
Cathinones, synthetic cannabinoids
Hyperthermia, tachycardia, delirium, agitation, 
mydriases
See 
Chapter 157.
CNS, Central nervous system.
From Ruha AM, Levine M. Central nervous system toxicity. 
Emerg Med Clin North Am
. 2015;32(1):205–221, p. 208.
Table 94.5 
 
  Predicting Toxicity from Vital Signs
BRADYCARDIA (PACED)
P
ropranolol (
β
 blockers), poppies (opioids), propoxyphene, 
physostigmine
A
nticholinesterase drugs, antiarrhythmics
C
lonidine, calcium channel blockers
E
thanol or other alcohols
D
igoxin, digitalis
TACHYCARDIA (FAST)
F
ree base or other forms of cocaine, Freon
A
nticholinergics, antihistamines, antipsychotics amphetamines, 
alcohol withdrawal
S
ympathomimetics (cocaine, caffeine, amphetamines, phencyclidine 
[PCP]), solvent abuse, strychnine
T
heophylline, tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), thyroid hormones
HYPOTHERMIA (COOLS)
C
arbon monoxide
O
pioids
O
ral hypoglycemics, insulin
L
iquor (alcohols)
S
edative- hypnotics
HYPERTHERMIA (NASA)
N
euroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS), nicotine
A
ntihistamines, alcohol withdrawal
S
alicylates, sympathomimetics, serotonin syndrome
A
nticholinergics, antidepressants, antipsychotics
HYPOTENSION (CRASH)
C
lonidine, calcium channel blockers
R
odenticides (containing arsenic, cyanide)
A
ntidepressants, aminophylline, antihypertensives
S
edative- hypnotics (xylazine)
H
eroin or other opioids
HYPERTENSION (CT SCAN)
C
ocaine
T
hyroid supplements
S
ympathomimetics
C
affeine
A
nticholinergics, amphetamines
N
icotine
RAPID RESPIRATION (PANT)
P
CP, paraquat, pneumonitis, phosgene
A
cetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and other salicylates
N
oncardiogenic pulmonary edema, nerve agents
T
oxin- induced metabolic acidosis
SLOW RESPIRATION (SLOW)
S
edative- hypnotics (barbiturates, benzodiazepines, xylazine)
L
iquor (alcohols)
O
pioids
W
eed (marijuana)
From Meehan TJ. Approach to the poisoned patient. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS, Gausche- Hill M, et al., eds. 
Rosen’s Emergency Medicine,
 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, 
Box 
139.6
, p. 1816.
Physical Examination
A targeted physical examination is important to identifying the 
potential toxin and assessing the severity of the exposure. Initial 
efforts should be directed toward assessing and stabilizing the air
-
way, breathing, circulation, and mental status. Once the airway is 
secure and the patient is stable from a cardiopulmonary standpoint, 
a more extensive physical exam can help to identify characteristic 
findings of specific toxins or classes of toxins.
In the poisoned patient, key features of the physical exam are vital 
signs, mental status, pupils (size, reactivity), nystagmus, skin, bowel 
sounds,	and	muscle	tone.	These	findings	might	suggest	a	toxidrome,	
which can then guide the differential diagnosis and management.
 
Laboratory Evaluation
A basic chemistry panel (electrolytes, renal function, glucose) is nec
-
essary for all poisoned or potentially poisoned patients. Any patient 
with acidosis (low serum bicarbonate level on serum chemistry panel) 
must have an anion gap calculated because of the more specific differ
-
ential diagnoses associated with an elevated 
anion gap metabolic aci
-
dosis
 (
Table	94.6
). Patients with a known overdose of acetaminophen 
should	have	liver	transaminases	(alanine	transaminase	[ALT],	aspar
-
tate	transaminase	[AST])	and	international	normalized	ratio	(INR)	
assessed. A serum creatinine kinase level is indicated on any patient 
with a prolonged “down time” to evaluate for 
rhabdomyolysis
. A urine 
pregnancy test is mandatory for all postpubertal female patients. Based 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
705
on the clinical presentation and the presumed poison, additional labo
-
ratory tests may also be helpful. Acetaminophen is a widely available 
medication and a commonly detected co- ingestant with the potential 
for severe toxicity. There is an effective antidote to acetaminophen 
poisoning that is time dependent. Given that patients might initially 
be asymptomatic and might not report or be aware of acetaminophen 
ingestion, an acetaminophen level should be checked in all patients 
who present after an intentional exposure or ingestion.
For select intoxications (e.g., salicylates, some anticonvulsants, 
acetaminophen, iron, digoxin, methanol, ethanol, lithium, ethyl
-
ene glycol, theophylline, CO, lead), 
quantitative
 
blood concentra
-
tions
 are integral to confirming the diagnosis and formulating a 
treatment plan. However, for most other exposures, quantitative 
measurement is not readily available and is not likely to alter man
-
agement. All intoxicant levels must be interpreted in conjunction 
with the history. For example, a methanol level of 20 mg/dL 1 hour 
after ingestion may be nontoxic, whereas a similar level 24 hours 
after ingestion implies a significant poisoning. In general, patients 
with multiple or chronic exposures to a drug or other chemical will 
be more symptomatic at lower drug levels than those with a single 
acute exposure.
Both the rapid urine drug- of- abuse screens and the more com
-
prehensive drug screens vary widely in their ability to detect toxins 
and	generally	add	little	information	to	the	clinical	assessment.	This	
is particularly true if the agent is known and the patient’s symp
-
toms are consistent with that agent. If a drug screen is ordered, it is 
important to know that the components screened for, and the lower 
limits of detection, vary from laboratory to laboratory. In addition, 
the interpretation of most drug screens is hampered by many false- 
positive and false- negative results. Many opiate toxicology screens 
poorly detect hydrocodone and do not detect the fully synthetic opi
-
oids at all (e.g., meperidine, methadone, buprenorphine, fentanyl, 
carfentanil, furanylfentanyl, tramadol). Several common benzodi
-
azepines (e.g., alprazolam and clonazepam) may not be detected; 
synthetic	cannabinoids	or	“bath	salts”	may	also	be	missed.	The	
amphetamine screen, on the other hand, is typically overly sensitive 
and often is triggered by prescription amphetamines and some over- 
the- counter cold preparations. As such, the urine drug- of- abuse 
screen is typically of limited utility for the poisoned patient but may 
serve a useful function for other providers, including psychiatrists, 
in their evaluation of the adolescent patient. Urine drug- of- abuse 
screens are potentially helpful in patients with altered mental status 
of unknown etiology, persistent unexplained tachycardia, and acute 
myocardial	ischemia	or	stroke	at	a	young	age.	These	screens	can	
also be useful in the assessment of a neglected or abused child. Con
-
sultation with a medical toxicologist can be helpful in interpreting 
drug screens and directing which specific drug levels or other labo
-
ratory analyses might aid in patient management.
In the case of a neglected or allegedly abused child, a positive 
toxicology screen can add substantial weight to a claim of abuse or 
neglect. In these cases, and any case with medicolegal implications, 
any positive screen 
must
 be followed by confirmatory testing (most 
commonly via gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy), which is 
considered the gold- standard measurement for legal purposes.
 
Additional Diagnostic Testing
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a quick and noninvasive bedside test 
that can yield important clues to diagnosis and prognosis. Particular 
attention should be paid to the ECG intervals (
Table	94.7
). A widened 
QRS interval, putting the patient at risk for monomorphic ventricu
-
lar tachycardia, suggests blockade of fast sodium channels. A wid
-
ened	QTc	interval	suggests	effects	at	the	potassium	rectifier	channels	
and portends a risk of torsades de pointes (polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia).
Further diagnostic testing is based on the differential diagnosis and 
pattern of presentation. For example, adjunctive chest radiography 
may reveal signs of pneumonitis (e.g., hydrocarbon aspiration), non
-
cardiogenic pulmonary edema (e.g., salicylate toxicity), or a foreign 
body. Abdominal radiography is most helpful in screening for the pres
-
ence of lead paint chips or other foreign bodies. It may detect a 
bezoar
 
(concretion), demonstrate radiopaque tablets, or reveal drug packets 
in a “body packer.”
 
  
 
  Laboratory Clues in Toxicologic Diagnosis
ANION GAP METABOLIC ACIDOSIS (MNEMONIC = MUDPILES 
CAT)
M
ethanol, metformin
U
remia
D
iabetic ketoacidosis
P
ropylene glycol
I
soniazid, iron, massive ibuprofen
L
actic acidosis
E
thylene glycol
S
alicylates
C
ellular asphyxiants (cyanide, carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide)
A
lcoholic ketoacidosis
T
ylenol (clinical significance depends upon presence or absence of 
liver injury), toluene
ELEVATED OSMOLAR GAP
Alcohols: ethanol, isopropyl, methanol, ethylene glycol
HYPOGLYCEMIA (MNEMONIC = HOBBIES)
H
ypoglycemics, oral: sulfonylureas, meglitinides
O
ther: quinine, unripe ackee fruit
B
eta 
B
lockers
I
nsulin
E
thanol
S
alicylates (late)
HYPERGLYCEMIA
Salicylates (early)
Calcium channel blockers
Caffeine
HYPOCALCEMIA
Ethylene glycol
Fluoride
RHABDOMYOLYSIS
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, serotonin syndrome
Statins
Mushrooms (Tricholoma equestre)
Any toxin causing prolonged immobilization (e.g., opioids, 
antipsychotics) or excessive muscle activity or seizures (e.g., 
sympathomimetics)
RADIOPAQUE SUBSTANCE ON KUB (MNEMONIC = CHIPPED)
C
hloral hydrate, calcium carbonate
H
eavy metals (lead, zinc, barium, arsenic, lithium, bismuth)
I
ron
P
henothiazines
P
lay- Doh, potassium chloride
E
nteric- coated pills
D
ental amalgam, drug packets
KUB, Kidney- ureter- bladder radiograph.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

706 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
The principles of management of the poisoned patient are supportive 
care, decontamination, directed therapy, and enhanced elimination.
 Few 
patients meet criteria for all these interventions, although clinicians 
should consider each option in every poisoned patient so as not to miss 
a potentially lifesaving intervention. Antidotes are available for rela
-
tively few poisons (
Tables	94.8	and	94.9
), thus emphasizing the impor
-
tance of meticulous supportive care and close clinical monitoring.
Poison control center personnel are specifically trained to provide 
expertise in the management of poisoning exposures. Parents should 
be instructed to call the poison control center 
(1- 800- 222- 1222)
 for 
any concerning exposure. PCC specialists can assist parents in assess
-
ing the potential toxicity and severity of the exposure. They can further 
determine which children can be safely monitored at home and which 
children should be referred to the emergency department for further 
evaluation and care. Although up to one third of calls to PCCs involve 
hospitalized patients, 86% of PCC calls for exposures in children <6 
years old are managed at home. The AAPCC has generated consen
-
sus statements for out- of- hospital management of common ingestions 
(e.g., acetaminophen, iron, calcium channel blockers [CCBs]) that 
serve to guide poison center recommendations.
Supportive Care
Careful attention is paid first to the “ABCs” of airway, breathing, and cir
-
culation; there should be a low threshold to aggressively manage the air
-
way of a poisoned patient because of the patient’s propensity to quickly 
become comatose. Endotracheal intubation is often the only significant 
intervention needed in many poisoned patients. An important caveat 
is the tachypneic patient with a clear lung examination and normal 
oxygen saturation. This should alert the clinician to the likelihood that 
the patient is compensating for an acidemia. Paralyzing such a patient 
and underventilating might prove fatal. If intubation is necessary for 
airway protection or a tiring patient, a good rule of thumb is to match 
the ventilatory settings to the patient’s preintubation minute ventilation.
Hypotensive poisoned patients often are not hypovolemic, and 
aggressive fluid resuscitation may lead to fluid overload. If hypoten
-
sion persists after one to two standard boluses of crystalloid, infusion 
of a direct- acting vasopressor, such as norepinephrine or epinephrine, 
is preferred. Dysrhythmias are typically managed in the standard man
-
ner. The exceptions are for dysrhythmias caused by agents that block 
fast sodium channels of the heart, for which boluses of sodium bicar
-
bonate are given; dysrhythmias caused by hydrocarbons, which should 
be treated with 
β
 blockers; and an overall avoidance of amiodarone for 
toxicologic- induced arrythmias.
Seizures should primarily be managed with agents that potentiate 
the 
γ
- aminobutyric acid (GABA) complex, such as benzodiazepines 
or barbiturates. Using sodium channel blockers such as phenytoin 
is	likely	to	be	ineffective	and	potentially	harmful.	The	goal	of	sup
-
portive therapy is to support the patient’s vital functions until the 
patient can eliminate the toxin. Patients with an elevated creatine 
phosphokinase (CPK) should be aggressively hydrated with crystal
-
loid, with a goal urine output of 1- 2 mL/kg/hr and close monitoring 
of CPK trend.
 
Decontamination
Most poisonings in children are from ingestion, although exposures 
can also occur by inhalational, dermal, and ocular routes (
Table	94.10
). 
The goal of decontamination is to minimize absorption of the toxic 
substance. The specific method employed depends on the properties 
of the toxin itself and the route of exposure. Regardless of the decon
-
tamination method used, the efficacy of the intervention decreases 
with increasing time since exposure. 
Decontamination should not be 
routinely employed for every poisoned patient.
 Instead, careful deci
-
sions regarding the utility of decontamination should be made for each 
patient and should include consideration of the toxicity and pharma
-
cologic properties of the exposure, route of the exposure, time since the 
exposure, and risks vs benefits of the decontamination method.
Dermal and ocular decontamination begins with removal of any 
contaminated clothing and particulate matter, followed by flushing 
of	the	affected	area	with	tepid	water	or	normal	saline	(NS).	Treating	
clinicians should wear proper protective gear when performing irri
-
gation. Flushing for a minimum of 10- 20 minutes is recommended 
for most exposures, although some chemicals (e.g., alkaline cor
-
rosives) require much longer periods of flushing. Dermal decon
-
tamination, especially after exposure to adherent or lipophilic (e.g., 
organophosphates) agents, should include thorough cleansing with 
soap and water. Water should 
not
 be used for decontamination after 
exposure to highly reactive agents, such as elemental sodium, phos
-
phorus, calcium oxide, and titanium tetrachloride. After an inha
-
lational exposure, decontamination involves moving the patient to 
fresh air and administering supplemental oxygen if indicated.
Gastrointestinal (GI) decontamination strategies are most likely 
to be effective in the 1- 2 hours after an acute ingestion
. GI absorp
-
tion may be delayed after ingestion of agents that slow GI motil
-
ity (anticholinergic medications, opioids), massive amounts of 
pills, sustained- release (SR) preparations, and agents that can form 
pharmacologic bezoars (e.g., enteric- coated salicylates). GI decon
-
tamination more than 2 hours after ingestion may be considered in 
patients who ingest toxic substances with these properties. However, 
even rapid institution of GI decontamination with activated char
-
coal will bind only approximately 30% of the ingested substance. GI 
decontamination should never supplant excellent supportive care 
and should not be employed in an unstable or persistently vomit
-
ing patient. Methods of GI decontamination include induced eme
-
sis with ipecac, gastric lavage, cathartics, activated charcoal, and 
whole- bowel irrigation (WBI). 
Of these, only activated charcoal and 
WBI are of potential benefit.
Table 94.7 
 
  Electrocardiographic Findings in Poisoning
PR INTERVAL PROLONGATION
Digoxin
Lithium
Calcium channel antagonists
β
- Antagonists
QRS PROLONGATION
Tricyclic antidepressants
Diphenhydramine
Carbamazepine
Cardiac glycosides
Chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine
Cocaine
Lamotrigine
Quinidine, quinine, procainamide, disopyramide
Phenothiazines
Propoxyphene
Propranolol
Bupropion, venlafaxine (rare)
QT
c
 PROLONGATION
*
Amiodarone
Antipsychotics (typical and atypical)
Arsenic
Cisapride
Citalopram
Clarithromycin, erythromycin
Disopyramide, dofetilide, ibutilide
Fluconazole, ketoconazole, itraconazole
Methadone
Pentamidine
Phenothiazines
Sotalol
*This is a select list of important toxins; other medications are also associated with QTc 
prolongation.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
707
Table 94.8 
 
  Common Antidotes for Poisoning
POISON
ANTIDOTE
DOSAGE
ROUTE
ADVERSE EFFECTS, WARNINGS, 
COMMENTS
Acetaminophen
N
- Acetylcysteine 
(Mucomyst)
140 mg/kg loading, followed by 70 mg/kg q4h 
for 17 additional doses (total of 72 hr)
PO
Vomiting (patient- tailored regimens 
are the norm)
N
- Acetylcysteine 
(Acetadote)
150 mg/kg over 1 hr, followed by 50 mg/kg 
over 4 hr, followed by 100 mg/kg over 16 hr
IV
Anaphylactoid reactions (most 
 
commonly seen with loading dose)
Higher doses of the infusion are 
often recommended depending 
on acetaminophen level or degree 
of injury
Anticholinergics
Physostigmine
0.02 mg/kg over 5 min; may repeat q5- 10 min 
to 2 mg max
IV/IM
Bradycardia, seizures, bronchospasm
Note:
 Relatively contraindicated if 
conduction delays on ECG.
Benzodiazepines
Flumazenil
0.2 mg over 30 sec; if response is inadequate, 
repeat q1min to 1 mg max
IV
Agitation, seizures from precipitated 
withdrawal (doses over 1 mg)
Relatively contraindicated for 
 
unknown or polypharmacy 
 
ingestions
β
 Blockers
Glucagon
0.15 mg/kg bolus followed by infusion of 
0.05- 0.15 mg/kg/hr
IV
Vomiting, relative lack of efficacy
Calcium channel 
blockers
Insulin
1 unit/kg bolus followed by infusion 
 
of 1-10 units/kg/hr
IV
Hypoglycemia
Follow serum potassium and glucose 
closely.
Calcium salts
Dose depends on the specific calcium salt
IV
Carbon monoxide
Oxygen
100% F
iO
2
 by non- rebreather mask (or ETT if 
intubated)
Inhalation
Some patients may benefit from 
hyperbaric oxygen (see text).
Cyanide
Hydroxocobalamin 
(Cyanokit)
70 mg/kg (adults: 5 g) given over 15 min
IV
Flushing/erythema, nausea, rash, 
chromaturia, hypertension, 
 
headache
Digitalis
Digoxin- specific 
Fab antibodies 
(Digibind, DigiFab)
1 vial binds 0.6 mg of digitalis glycoside;
#
vials = digitalis level × weight in kg/100
IV
Allergic reactions (rare), return of 
condition being treated with 
 
digitalis glycoside
Ethylene glycol, 
methanol
Fomepizole
15 mg/kg load; 10 mg/kg q12h × 4 doses; 
15 mg/kg q12h until ethylene glycol level is 
<20	mg/dL
IV
Infuse slowly over 30 min
If fomepizole is not available, can 
treat with oral ethanol (80 proof)
Iron
Deferoxamine
Infusion of 15 mg/kg/hr (max: 6 g/24 hr)
IV
Hypotension (minimized by titrating 
dose up slowly)
Isoniazid (INH)
Pyridoxine
Empirical dosing: 70 mg/kg (max dose = 5 g)
If ingested dose is known: 1 g per gram of 
INH
IV
May also be used for 
Gyromitra
 
mushroom ingestions
Lead and other 
heavy metals 
(e.g., arsenic, 
inorganic 
mercury)
BAL (dimercaprol)
3- 5 mg/kg/dose q4h, for the first day; 
subsequent dosing depends on the toxin
Deep IM
Local injection site pain and sterile 
abscess, vomiting, fever, salivation, 
nephrotoxicity
Caution:
 Prepared in peanut oil; 
contraindicated in patients with 
peanut allergy
Calcium disodium 
EDTA
35- 50 mg/kg/day × 5 days; may be given as a 
continuous infusion or 2 divided doses/day
IV
Vomiting, fever, hypertension, 
arthralgias, allergic reactions, 
local inflammation, nephrotoxicity 
(maintain adequate hydration; 
follow UA and renal function)
Dimercaptosuccinic 
acid (succimer, 
DMSA, Chemet)
10 mg/kg/dose q8h × 5 days, then 10 mg/kg 
q12h × 14 days
PO
Vomiting, hepatic transaminase 
elevation, rash
Methemoglobine
-
mia
Methylene blue, 1% 
solution
0.1- 0.2 mL/kg (1- 2 mg/kg) over 5- 10 min; may 
be repeated q30- 60 min
IV
Vomiting, headache, dizziness, blue 
discoloration of urine
Opioids
Naloxone
1 mg if patient not likely to be addicted
0.04- 0.4 mg if possibly addicted; repeated 
as needed; may need continuous infusion; 
higher and prolonged dosing is required for 
novel potent opioid overdose
IV, intranasal, 
IO, IM, 
nebulized
Acute withdrawal symptoms if given 
to addicted patients
May also be useful for clonidine 
 
ingestions (typically at higher 
doses)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

708 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
POISON
ANTIDOTE
DOSAGE
ROUTE
ADVERSE EFFECTS, WARNINGS, 
COMMENTS
Organophosphates
Atropine
0.05- 0.1 mg/kg repeated q5- 10 min as needed
IV/ET
Tachycardia, dry mouth, blurred 
 
vision, urinary retention
Pralidoxime (2- PAM)
25- 50 mg/kg over 5- 10 min (max: 200 mg/min); 
can be repeated after 1- 2 hr, then q10- 12h 
as needed
IV/IM
Nausea, dizziness, headache, 
 
tachycardia, muscle rigidity, 
 
bronchospasm (rapid administration)
Salicylates
Sodium bicarbonate
Bolus 1- 2 mEq/kg followed by continuous 
infusion
IV
Follow potassium closely and replace 
as necessary.
Goal urine pH: 7.5- 8.0
Sulfonylureas
Octreotide and 
dextrose
1- 2 μg/kg/dose (adults 50- 100 μg) q6- 8h
IV/SC
Tricyclic 
antidepressants
Sodium bicarbonate
Bolus 1- 2 mEq/kg; repeated bolus dosing as 
needed	to	keep	QRS	<110	msec
IV
Indications: QRS widening 
(
≥
110 msec), hemodynamic 
 
instability; follow potassium.
BAL, British antilewisite; DMSA, dimercaptosuccinic acid; ECG, electrocardiogram; F
iO
2
, fraction of inspired oxygen; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; ET, endotracheal tube; 
IO, intraosseous; max, maximum; UA, urinalysis.
Table 94.8 
 
  Common Antidotes for Poisoning—cont’d
Table 94.9 
 
  Other Antidotes
ANTIDOTES
TOXIN OR POISON
Latrodectus antivenin
Black widow spider
Botulinum antitoxin
Botulinum toxin
Diphenhydramine and/
or benztropine
Dystonic reactions
Calcium salts
Fluoride, calcium channel blockers
Intravenous lipid 
 
emulsion (ILE)
Local anesthetics; consider for bupropion, 
calcium channel blockers, 
β
 blockers, 
and type I antidysrhythmics
Protamine
Heparin
Folinic acid
Methotrexate, trimethoprim, 
pyrimethamine, methanol
Crotalidae- specific Fab 
antibodies
Rattlesnake envenomation
Sodium bicarbonate
Sodium channel blockade (tricyclic anti-
depressants, type 1 antiarrhythmics)
Table 94.10 
 
  Toxins Associated with Systemic Toxicity 
 
After Dermal Absorption
Aniline dyes
Camphor
Dinitrophenol
Hexachlorophene
Hydrofluoric acid
Lindane (
γ
- benzene hydrochloride)
Organophosphate insecticide
Nerve agents
Nitrobenzene
Organic mercury
Phenol
Thallium
From Shannon MW. Emergency management of poisoning. In: Shannon MW, Borron 
SW, Burns MJ, eds. 
Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning and 
Drug Overdose,
 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007, 
Box 2
A- 12, p. 28.
Syrup of Ipecac
Syrup of ipecac contains two emetic alkaloids that work in both the 
central nervous system (CNS) and locally in the GI tract to produce 
vomiting. Many studies have failed to document a significant clinical 
impact from the use of ipecac and have documented multiple adverse 
events	from	its	use.	The	AAP,	the	American	Academy	of	Clinical	Toxi
-
cology	(AACT),	and	the	AAPCC	have	all	published	statements	in	favor	
of 
abandoning the use of ipecac.
 
Gastric Lavage
Gastric lavage involves placing a large tube orally into the stomach 
to aspirate contents, followed by flushing with aliquots of fluid, usu
-
ally water or NS. Although gastric lavage was used routinely for many 
years, objective data do not document or support clinically relevant 
efficacy. This is particularly true in children, in whom only small- bore 
tubes can be used. Lavage is time- consuming and painful and can 
induce bradycardia through a vagal response to tube placement. It can 
delay administration of more definitive treatment (activated charcoal) 
and under the best circumstances, only removes a fraction of gastric 
contents. 
Thus, in most clinical scenarios, the use of gastric lavage is no 
longer recommended.
 
Single- Dose Activated Charcoal
Activated charcoal is a potentially useful method of GI decontamina
-
tion. Charcoal is “activated” by heating to extreme temperatures, creat
-
ing an extensive network of pores that provides a very large adsorptive 
surface area that many (but not all) toxins will bind to, preventing 
absorption from the GI tract. Charged molecules (i.e., heavy met
-
als, lithium, iron) and liquids do not bind well to activated charcoal 
(
Table	94.11
). Administration should also be avoided after ingestion 
of a caustic substance, as it can impede subsequent endoscopic evalu
-
ation. 
Charcoal is most likely to be effective when given within 1 hour of 
ingestion.
 A repeat dose of activated charcoal may be warranted in the 
cases of ingestion of an extended- release product or, more frequently, 
with significant salicylate poisoning as a result of its delayed and erratic 
absorption pattern.
The dose of activated charcoal, with or without sorbitol, is 1g/kg in 
children or 50- 100 g in adolescents and adults
. Before administering 
charcoal, one 
must
 ensure that the patient’s airway is intact or pro
-
tected and that the patient has a benign abdominal examination. In the 
awake, uncooperative adolescent or child who refuses to drink the acti
-
vated charcoal, there is little utility and potential morbidity associated 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
709
with forcing activated charcoal down a nasogastric (NG) tube, and 
such practice should be avoided. In young children, practitioners can 
attempt to improve palatability by adding flavorings (chocolate or 
cherry syrup) or giving the mixture over ice cream. Approximately 20% 
of children vomit after receiving a dose of charcoal, emphasizing the 
importance of an intact airway and avoiding administration of char
-
coal after ingestion of substances that are particularly toxic when aspi
-
rated (e.g., hydrocarbons). If charcoal is given through a gastric tube 
in an intubated patient, placement of the tube should be confirmed 
before activated charcoal is given. Instillation of charcoal directly into 
the lungs can have disastrous effects. Constipation is another common 
side effect of activated charcoal, and in rare cases, bowel perforation 
has been reported.
Cathartics
 (sorbitol, magnesium sulfate, magnesium citrate) have 
been used in conjunction with activated charcoal to prevent constipa
-
tion and accelerate evacuation of the charcoal- toxin complex. There 
are no data demonstrating their value and numerous reports of adverse 
effects from cathartics, such as dehydration and electrolyte imbalance.
 
−  
WBI involves instilling large volumes (25 mL/kg/hr in children or 1- 2 
L/hr in adolescents
) of a polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution (e.g., 
GoLYTELY)	to	“wash	out”	the	entire	GI	tract.	This	technique	may	have	
some success for the ingestion of SR preparations, substances not well 
adsorbed by charcoal (e.g., lithium, iron), transdermal patches, for
-
eign bodies, and drug packets. WBI is most frequently administered 
to decontaminate the gut of a child whose abdominal radiograph dem
-
onstrates multiple lead paint chips. Careful attention should be paid to 
assessment of the airway and abdominal exam before initiating WBI. 
WBI should never be given to a patient with signs of obstruction or 
ileus or with a compromised airway. Given the rate of administration 
and volume needed to flush the system, WBI is typically administered 
by NG tube. WBI is continued until the rectal effluent is clear. If the 
WBI is for a child with ingested paint chips, the end- point will be clear
-
ing of the chips from the bowel based on repeat radiographs. Com
-
plications of WBI include vomiting, abdominal pain, and abdominal 
distention. Bezoar formation might respond to WBI but may also 
require endoscopy or surgery.
 
Directed Therapy
Antidotal Therapy
Antidotes are available for relatively few toxins (see 
Tables	94.8	and	
94.9
), but early and appropriate use of an antidote is a key element in 
managing the poisoned patient.
 
   
Intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) therapy is a potentially lifesaving 
intervention. ILE therapy sequesters fat- soluble drugs, decreasing 
their impact at target organs; this is known as a “lipid sink.” It also 
enhances cardiac function by supplying an alternative energy source 
to a depressed myocardium and acting on calcium channels in the 
heart, increasing myocardial calcium and thus cardiac function. ILE is 
most effective as a reversal agent for toxicity from inadvertent intrave
-
nous (IV) injection of bupivacaine. Using the same 20% lipid solution 
used	for	total	parenteral	nutrition	(TPN),	a	bolus	dose	of	1.5	mL/kg	is	
given over 3 minutes, followed by an infusion of 0.25 mL/kg/min until 
recovery or until a total of 10 mL/kg 
has been infused. 
Lipophilic drugs,
 
those in which the logarithm of the coefficient describing the partition 
between two solvents (hydrophobic phase and hydrophilic phase) is 
>2, have the most potential to be bound by ILE. These include but are 
not limited to CCBs (verapamil, diltiazem), bupropion, tricyclic anti
-
depressants, and refractory 
β
- blocker overdose. Complications asso
-
ciated with ILE include significant lipemia that interferes with serum 
laboratory tests, pancreatitis, and acute respiratory distress syndrome 
(ARDS).
 
Enhanced Elimination
Enhancing elimination results in increased clearance of a poison that 
has already been absorbed. It is only useful for a few toxins and in these 
cases is a potentially lifesaving intervention. Methods of enhanced 
elimination include urinary alkalinization, hemodialysis, and multi
-
dose activated charcoal.
Urinary Alkalinization
Urinary alkalinization enhances the elimination of drugs that are weak 
acids by forming charged molecules, which then become trapped in 
the renal tubules. Charged molecules, being polar and hydrophilic, 
do not easily cross cellular membranes; thus they remain in the renal 
tubules and are excreted. Urinary alkalinization is accomplished by a 
continuous infusion of sodium bicarbonate–containing IV fluids, with 
a goal urine pH of 7.5- 8. Alkalinization of the urine is most useful in 
managing salicylate and methotrexate toxicity. Complications of uri
-
nary alkalinization include electrolyte derangements (e.g., hypokale
-
mia, hypocalcemia), fluid overload, and excessive serum alkalinization. 
Serum pH should be closely monitored and not exceed a pH >7.55. 
Patients typically unable to tolerate the volumes required for alkalini
-
zation are those with heart failure, kidney failure, pulmonary edema, 
or cerebral edema.
 

Few drugs or toxins are removed by dialysis in amounts sufficient to 
justify	the	risks	and	difficulty	of	dialysis.	Toxins	amenable	to	dial
-
ysis have the following properties: low volume of distribution (<1 
L/kg) with a high degree of water solubility, low molecular weight, 
and low degree of protein binding. Hemodialysis may be useful for 
toxicity from methanol, ethylene glycol, salicylates, theophylline, 
bromide, lithium, and valproic acid. Hemodialysis is also used to 
correct severe electrolyte disturbances and acid- base derangements 
resulting from the ingestion (e.g., severe metformin- associated lac
-
tic acidosis).
 
  
Whereas single- dose activated charcoal is used as a method of 
decontamination, multidose activated charcoal (
MDAC
) can help to 
enhance the elimination of certain toxins. MDAC is typically given 
as 0.5 g/kg every 4- 6 hr (for four doses
). MDAC enhances elimina
-
tion by two proposed mechanisms: interruption of enterohepatic 
recirculation and “GI dialysis.” The concept of GI dialysis involves 
using the intestinal mucosa as a dialysis membrane and pulling toxins 
from the bloodstream back into the intraluminal space, where they 
are	adsorbed	to	the	charcoal.	The	AACT/European	Association	of	
Poisons	Centres	and	Clinical	Toxicologists	position	statement	rec
-
ommends MDAC in managing significant ingestions of carbamaze
-
pine, dapsone, phenobarbital, quinine, and theophylline. As with 
single- dose activated charcoal, contraindications to the use of MDAC 
include an unprotected airway and a concerning abdominal exami
-
nation (e.g., ileus, distention, peritoneal signs). Thus the airway and 
abdominal exam 
should be assessed before each dose.
 A cathartic (e.g., 
sorbitol) may be given with the first dose, but it should not be used 
with subsequent doses because of the risk of dehydration and electro
-
lyte derangements. Although MDAC reduces the serum level of an 
intoxicant quicker than without MDAC, it has not been shown to have 
a significant impact on outcome.
 
  
 
  Substances Poorly Adsorbed by Activated 
Charcoal
Alcohols
Caustics: alkalis and acids
Cyanide
Heavy metals (e.g., lead)
Hydrocarbons
Iron
Lithium
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

710 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
SELECT COMPOUNDS IN PEDIATRIC POISONING
See other chapters for drug use (
Chapter 157
) and environmental 
health hazards (
Chapters 757- 763
).
Pharmaceuticals
Analgesics
Acetaminophen
. 
Acetaminophen (APAP) is the most widely used 
analgesic and antipyretic in pediatrics, available in multiple formula
-
tions, strengths, and combinations. Consequently, APAP is commonly 
available in the home, where it can be unintentionally ingested by 
young children, taken in an intentional overdose by adolescents and 
adults, or inappropriately dosed in all ages. In the United States, APAP 
toxicity remains the most common cause of acute liver failure and one 
of the leading causes of death from oral poisonings.
Pathophysiology
. 
APAP toxicity results from the formation of a 
highly reactive intermediate metabolite, 
N
- acetyl- 
p
- benzoquinone 
imine (NAPQI). In therapeutic use, only a small percentage of a dose 
(approximately 5%) is metabolized by the hepatic cytochrome P450 
enzyme CYP2E1 to NAPQI, which is then immediately conjugated 
with glutathione to form a nontoxic mercapturic acid conjugate. In 
overdose, glutathione stores are overwhelmed, and free NAPQI is able 
to combine with hepatic macromolecules to produce hepatocellular 
necrosis. The single acute toxic dose of APAP is generally considered 
to be >200 mg/kg in children and >7.5- 10 g in adolescents and adults. 
Repeated administration of APAP at supratherapeutic doses (>90 mg/
kg/day for consecutive days) can lead to hepatic injury or failure in 
some children, especially in the setting of fever, dehydration, poor 
nutrition, and other conditions that serve to reduce glutathione stores.
Any child with a history of acute ingestion of >200 mg/kg (unusual 
in children <6 years) or with an acute intentional ingestion of any 
amount should be referred to a healthcare facility for clinical assess
-
ment and measurement of a serum APAP level.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Classically, four general 
stages of APAP toxicity have been described (
Table	94.12
). In the first 
24 hours after ingestion, patients are most frequently asymptomatic, 
although they may have nonspecific symptoms such as nausea/vomit
-
ing. Thus the diagnosis of APAP toxicity cannot be based on clinical 
symptoms alone, but instead requires consideration of the combination 
of the patient’s history, symptoms, and laboratory findings.
If a toxic ingestion is suspected, a serum APAP level should be mea
-
sured 4 hours after the reported time of ingestion. For patients who 
present to medical care more than 4 hours after ingestion, a stat APAP 
level should be obtained. 
APAP levels obtained <4 hours after ingestion, 
unless “nondetectable,” are difficult to interpret and cannot be used to 
estimate the potential for toxicity.
 Other important baseline laboratory 
tests include hepatic transaminases, bilirubin, renal function tests, and 
coagulation parameters.
 
Treatment
. 
When considering the treatment of a patient poisoned 
or potentially poisoned with APAP, and after assessment of the ABCs, it 
is helpful to place the patient into one of the following four categories:
1.
 
Prophylactic
. 
These	patients	have	a	normal	AST.	If	the	APAP	level	
is known and the ingestion is within 24 hours of the level being drawn, 
treatment decisions are based on where the level falls on the Rumack- 
Matthew nomogram (
Fig. 94.1
). Any patient with a serum APAP level 
in the possible or probable hepatotoxicity range per the nomogram 
should be treated with 
N
- acetylcysteine (NAC). This nomogram is only 
intended for use in patients who present within 24 hours of a single 
acute
 
APAP ingestion with a known time of ingestion. If treatment is recom
-
mended, they should receive NAC. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)–approved treatment regimens include a 21- hour protocol for IV 
administration and a 72- hour protocol for oral administration. Several 
shorter dosing regimens have been described and may be considered in 
consultation with a toxicologist. Regardless of treatment duration, serial 
transaminases	and	APAP	level	should	be	monitored.	If	the	AST	becomes	
elevated while receiving NAC, the patient moves into the next category 
of	treatment	(hepatic	injury,	see	later).	If	AST	remains	normal	but	APAP	
is still present, NAC should be continued until the level is nondetectable. 
In	the	case	of	a	patient	with	a	documented	APAP	level,	normal	AST,	and	
an unknown time of ingestion, treatment should ensue until the level is 
undetectable, with normal transaminases.
The importance of instituting therapy with either IV or oral NAC 
no 
later than 8 hours from the time of ingestion
 cannot be overemphasized. 
Hours After Ingestion
048121,000
(S.I. Units)
µM per L µg per mLProbable Hepatic ToxicityPossible Hepatic ToxicityNo Hepatic Toxicity
25%
50020015010050
Acetaminophen Plasma Concentration
1051020304050607080901002002503004005006007008009001,0001,3002,0003,0004,0005,0006,000162024
Fig. 94.1
 Rumack- Matthew nomogram for acetaminophen poison
-
ing, a semilogarithmic plot of plasma acetaminophen concentrations 
vs time. 
Cautions for the use of this chart:
 The time coordinates refer 
to time after ingestion; serum concentrations obtained before 4 hours 
are not interpretable, and the graph should be used only in relation to a 
single acute ingestion with a known time of ingestion. This nomogram 
is not useful for chronic exposures or unknown time of ingestion and 
should be used with caution in the setting of co- ingestants that slow 
gastrointestinal motility. The 
lower solid line
 is typically used in the Unit
-
ed States to define toxicity and direct treatment, whereas the 
upper line
 
is generally used in Europe. 
(From Rumack BH, Hess AJ, eds.
 Poisin
-
dex, 
Denver: Micromedix; 1995. Adapted from Rumack BH, Matthew H. 
Acetaminophen poisoning and toxicity.
 
Pediatrics
.
1975;55:871–876.)
Table 94.12 
 
  Classic Stages in Clinical Course of 
 
Acetaminophen Toxicity
STAGE
TIME AFTER 
INGESTION
CHARACTERISTICS
I
0- 24 hr
Anorexia, vomiting, malaise
Laboratory tests typically normal, except 
for acetaminophen level
II
24- 48 hr
Resolution of earlier symptoms; right 
 
upper quadrant abdominal pain and 
 
tenderness; elevated hepatic 
 
transaminases	(aspartate	>	alanine),	INR
III
3- 5 days
Peak transaminase elevations; 
development of liver failure, multiorgan 
system failure, death 
or
 recovery begins
IV
4 days to 2 wk
Resolution of liver function abnormalities
Clinical recovery precedes histologic 
recovery
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
711
No patient, regardless of the size of the ingestion, who receives NAC 
within 8 hours of overdose should die from liver failure. The longer 
from the 8 hour- mark that the initiation of therapy is delayed, the 
greater the risk of acute liver failure. Any patient presenting close to or 
beyond the 8- hour mark after an APAP overdose should be empirically 
started on NAC pending laboratory results.
 
2.
 
Hepatic Injury
. 
These patients exhibit evidence of hepatocellular 
necrosis,	manifested	first	as	elevated	liver	transaminases	(usually	AST	
first,	then	ALT),	followed	by	a	rise	in	the	INR.	Any	patient	in	this	cat
-
egory requires therapy with NAC (IV or oral). When to discontinue ther
-
apy in the clinically well- appearing patient remains controversial, but in 
general NAC can be discontinued when the transaminases and INR have 
peaked and are declining significantly (they do not need to be normal). 
Most patients’ liver enzymes will peak 3- 4 days after their ingestion.
 
3.
 
Acute Liver Failure
. 
The King’s College criteria are used to deter
-
mine which patients should be referred for consideration of liver trans
-
plant. These criteria are met when a patient exhibits either acidemia 
(serum pH <7.3) after adequate fluid resuscitation or all three of the 
following: coagulopathy (INR >6.5), renal dysfunction (creatinine >3.4 
mg/dL), and grade III or IV hepatic encephalopathy (see 
Chapter 412
). 
A serum lactic acid >3 mmol/L (after IV fluids) adds to both sensitivity 
and specificity of the criteria to predict death without liver transplant. 
The degree of transaminase elevation does not factor into this decision- 
making process.
 
4.
 
Repeated Supratherapeutic Ingestion
. 
APAP is particularly prone 
to unintentional overdose through the ingestion of multiple medica
-
tions containing the drug or simply because people assume it to be 
safe at any dose. Ingestion of amounts significantly greater than the 
recommended daily dose for several days or more puts one at risk for 
liver injury. Because the Rumack- Matthew nomogram is not helpful in 
this scenario, a conservative approach is taken. In the asymptomatic 
patient,	if	the	AST	is	normal	and	the	APAP	is	<10	
μ
g/mL, no ther
-
apy	is	indicated.	A	normal	AST	and	an	elevated	APAP	warrant	NAC	
dosing for at least long enough for the drug to metabolize while the 
AST	remains	normal.	An	elevated	AST	puts	the	patient	in	the	“hepatic	
injury” category previously described. A patient presenting with symp
-
toms (i.e., right upper quadrant pain, vomiting, jaundice) should be 
empirically started on NAC pending laboratory results.
NAC is available in oral and IV forms, and both are considered 
equally efficacious (see 
Table	94.8
 for the dosing regimens of the oral 
and IV form). The IV form is used in patients with intractable vom
-
iting, those with evidence of hepatic failure, and pregnant patients. 
Oral NAC has an unpleasant taste and smell and can be mixed in a 
soft drink or fruit juice or given by NG tube to improve tolerability of 
the oral regimen. Administration of IV NAC (as a standard 3% solu
-
tion to avoid administering excess free water, typically in 5% dextrose), 
especially the initial loading dose, is associated in some patients with 
the development of anaphylactoid reactions (non–immunoglobulin E 
mediated). These reactions are typically managed by stopping the infu
-
sion; treating with diphenhydramine, albuterol, and/or epinephrine as 
indicated; and restarting the infusion at a slower rate once symptoms 
have resolved. IV NAC is also associated with mild elevation in mea
-
sured INR (range: 1.2- 1.5) because of laboratory interference. IV dos
-
ing, however, delivers less medication to the liver compared with the 
oral regimen. As a result, many toxicologists now recommend higher 
doses	of	the	IV	formulation	in	patients	with	large	overdoses.	Trans
-
aminases, synthetic function, and renal function should be followed 
at least daily while the patient is being treated with NAC. Patients with 
worsening hepatic function or clinical status might benefit from more 
frequent laboratory monitoring. A patient- tailored approach is now 
the norm for when to stop NAC therapy, for deciding whom to refer 
for transplantation evaluation, and often for the dose of IV NAC in 
patients with either very high APAP levels or signs of injury. Consulta
-
tion with the regional PCC and medical toxicologist can help stream
-
line the care of these patients, ultimately shortening their length of stay 
with potentially improved outcomes.
 
 
Although activated charcoal binds acetaminophen, risks of vomit
-
ing associated with large APAP overdoses as well as the likelihood of 
co- ingestion that may affect mental status must be considered. Acti
-
vated charcoal may be considered in the first 1- 2 hours after ingestion 
in an alert patient, but its use should not have bearing on the need 
for NAC. Similarly, hemodialysis is not routinely used in APAP over
-
dose but may be indicated in massive ingestions in consultation with 
a toxicologist.
Salicylates
. 
The incidence of salicylate poisoning in young children 
has declined dramatically since APAP and ibuprofen replaced aspirin 
as commonly used analgesics and antipyretics in pediatrics. However, 
salicylates remain widely available not only in aspirin- containing prod
-
ucts but also in antidiarrheal medications, topical agents (e.g., keratolyt
-
ics, sports creams), oil of wintergreen, and some herbal products. Oil of 
wintergreen contains 5 g of salicylate in 5 mL, meaning ingestion of very 
small volumes of this product has the potential to cause severe toxicity.
Pathophysiology
. 
Salicylates lead to toxicity by interacting with a 
wide array of physiologic processes, including direct stimulation of the 
respiratory center, uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation, inhibition 
of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and stimulation of glycolysis and gluco
-
neogenesis. The acute toxic dose of salicylates is generally considered 
to be >150 mg/kg. More significant toxicity is seen after ingestions of 
>300 mg/kg, and severe, potentially fatal, toxicity is described after 
ingestions of >500 mg/kg.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Salicylate ingestions are 
classified as acute or chronic, and acute toxicity is much more common 
in pediatric patients. Early signs of 
acute salicylism
 include nausea, 
vomiting, diaphoresis, and tinnitus. Moderate salicylate toxicity can 
manifest as tachypnea and hyperpnea, tachycardia, and altered mental 
status. The tachycardia largely results from marked insensible losses 
from vomiting, tachypnea, diaphoresis, and uncoupling of oxidative 
phosphorylation. Thus careful attention should be paid to volume sta
-
tus and early volume resuscitation in the significantly poisoned patient. 
Signs of severe salicylate toxicity include mild hyperthermia, coma, 
and seizures. 
Chronic salicylism
 can have a more insidious presenta
-
tion, and patients can show marked toxicity (e.g., altered mental status, 
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, acidemia) at significantly lower 
salicylate levels than in acute toxicity.
Classically, laboratory values from a patient poisoned with salicylates 
reveal a primary respiratory alkalosis and a primary, elevated anion 
gap metabolic acidosis. Early in the course of acute salicylism, respira
-
tory alkalosis dominates and the patient is alkalemic. As the respira
-
tory stimulation diminishes, the patient will move toward acidemia. 
Hyperglycemia (early) and hypoglycemia (late) have been described. 
Abnormal coagulation studies and acute kidney injury may be seen but 
are not common.
Serial serum salicylate levels should be closely monitored (every 2- 4 
hours initially) until they are consistently downtrending (three con
-
secutive levels <30 mg/dL and decreasing by at least 10–20% on each 
subsequent measurement). Salicylate absorption in overdose is unpre
-
dictable and erratic, especially with an enteric- coated product, and lev
-
els can rapidly increase into the highly toxic range, even many hours 
after the ingestion. The Done nomogram is of poor value and should 
not be used. Serum and urine pH and electrolytes should be followed 
closely. An APAP level should be checked in any patient who intention
-
ally overdoses on salicylates, because APAP is a common co- ingestant, 
and people often confuse or combine their nonprescription analgesic 
medications. Salicylate toxicity can cause a noncardiogenic pulmonary 
edema, especially in chronic overdose; consequently, a chest radio
-
graph is recommended in any patient in respiratory distress.
 
Treatment
. 
For the patient who presents soon after an acute inges
-
tion, initial treatment should include gastric decontamination with 
activated charcoal. Salicylate pills occasionally form bezoars, which 
should be suspected if serum salicylate concentrations continue to rise 
many hours after ingestion or are persistently elevated despite appro
-
priate management. Gastric decontamination is typically not useful 
after chronic exposure.
Initial therapy focuses on aggressive volume resuscitation and 
prompt initiation of sodium bicarbonate therapy in the symptom
-
atic patient, even before obtaining serum salicylate levels. Therapeu
-
tic salicylate levels are 10- 20 mg/dL, and levels >30 mg/dL warrant 
treatment.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

712 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
The primary mode of therapy for salicylate toxicity is 
urinary 
alkalinization
. Urinary alkalinization enhances the elimination of 
salicylates by converting salicylate to its ionized form, “trapping” it 
in the renal tubules. In addition, maintaining an alkalemic serum pH 
decreases CNS penetration of salicylates because charged particles are 
less able to cross the blood- brain barrier. Alkalinization is achieved by 
administration of a sodium bicarbonate infusion at approximately two 
times maintenance fluid rates. 
The goals of therapy include a urine pH 
of 7.5- 8, a serum pH of 7.45- 7.55, and decreasing serum salicylate levels.
 
In general, the lower the patient’s serum pH, the greater the relative 
amount of salicylate in the uncharged, nonpolar form and the greater 
amount of salicylate penetration of the blood- brain barrier. Salicylate 
penetration of the brain leads to severe consequences such as cerebral 
edema; therefore maintaining alkalemia is imperative. Careful atten
-
tion should also be paid to serial potassium levels in any patient on 
a bicarbonate infusion, because potassium will be driven intracellu
-
larly, and hypokalemia impairs alkalinization of the urine. For these 
reasons, potassium is often added to the bicarbonate drip. Repeat 
doses of charcoal may be beneficial because of the often delayed and 
erratic absorption of aspirin. Parenteral glucose should be provided 
to any salicylate- poisoned patients with altered mental status because 
they may have CNS hypoglycemia (i.e., neuroglycopenia) not seen in a 
peripheral serum glucose test.
In patients with severe toxicity, hemodialysis may be required. Indi
-
cations for dialysis include severe acid- base abnormalities (specifically 
severe acidosis and acidemia), a rising salicylate level (despite adequate 
decontamination and properly alkalinized urine), pulmonary edema 
or respiratory failure, cerebral edema, seizures, hepatic failure, and 
renal failure. Serum salicylate concentrations alone are not a clear indi
-
cator of the need for dialysis and should always be interpreted along 
with the clinical status of the patient.
 
Ibuprofen and Other Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs 
(NSAIDs)
. 
Ibuprofen and other NSAIDs are often involved in unin
-
tentional and intentional overdoses because of their widespread avail
-
ability and common use as analgesics and antipyretics. Fortunately, 
serious effects after acute NSAID overdose are rare because of their 
wide therapeutic index.
Pathophysiology
. 
NSAIDs inhibit prostaglandin synthesis by 
reversibly inhibiting the activity of cyclooxygenase (COX), the primary 
enzyme responsible for the biosynthesis of prostaglandins. In thera
-
peutic use, side effects include GI irritation, reduced renal blood flow, 
and	platelet	dysfunction.	To	minimize	these	side	effects,	NSAID	ana
-
logs have been developed that are more specific for the inducible form 
of COX (the COX- 2 isoform) than the constitutive form (COX- 1). 
However, overdose of the more selective COX- 2 inhibitors (e.g., cele
-
coxib [Celebrex]) is treated the same as overdose of nonspecific COX 
inhibitors (e.g., ibuprofen) because at higher doses, COX- 2–selective 
agents lose their COX inhibitory selectivity.
Ibuprofen, the primary NSAID used in pediatrics, is well tolerated, 
even in overdose. In children, acute doses of <200 mg/kg rarely cause 
toxicity, but ingestions of >400 mg/kg can produce more serious effects, 
including altered mental status and metabolic acidosis.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Symptoms usually 
develop within 4- 6 hours of ingestion and resolve within 24 hours. If 
toxicity does develop, it is typically manifested as nausea, vomiting, and 
abdominal pain. Although GI bleeding and ulcers have been described 
with chronic use, they are rare in the setting of acute ingestion. After 
massive ingestions, patients can develop marked CNS depression, anion 
gap metabolic acidosis, renal insufficiency, and (rarely) respiratory 
depression. Seizures have also been described, especially after overdose 
of mefenamic acid. Specific drug levels are not readily available, nor do 
they inform management decisions. Renal function studies, acid- base 
balance, complete blood count (CBC), and coagulation parameters 
should be monitored after very large ingestions. Co- ingestants, espe
-
cially APAP, should be ruled out after any intentional ingestion.
 
Treatment
. 
Supportive care, including use of antiemetics and 
acid blockade as indicated, is the primary therapy for NSAID toxic
-
ity. Decontamination with activated charcoal should be considered if a 
patient presents within 1- 2 hours of a potentially toxic ingestion. There 
is no specific antidote for this class of drugs. Given the high degree of 
protein binding and excretion pattern of NSAIDs, none of the modali
-
ties used to enhance elimination is particularly useful in managing 
these overdoses. Unlike in patients with salicylate toxicity, urinary 
alkalinization is not helpful for NSAID toxicity. Patients who develop 
significant clinical signs of toxicity should be admitted to the hospi
-
tal for ongoing supportive care and monitoring. Patients who remain 
asymptomatic for 4- 6 hours after ingestion do not require further med
-
ical care but may need psychiatric assessment if their ingestion was 
intentional.
 
Prescription Opioids
. 
Opioids are a frequently abused class of 
medications in both IV and oral forms. The opioid epidemic gripping 
the United States and other countries is discussed in 
Chapter 157.
	Two	
specific oral opioids, buprenorphine and methadone, merit mention 
because of potential life- threatening toxicity in toddlers with inges
-
tion of even one pill. Both agents are used in managing opioid use dis
-
order, although 
buprenorphine
 is the drug of choice. 
Methadone
 is 
also widely used in the treatment of chronic pain, meaning multiday 
prescriptions can be filled. Other agents commonly available in the 
home include morphine, oxycodone, and hydrocodone, as they are fre
-
quently prescribed to patients after injuries or surgical procedures. All 
of these drugs are also readily available for illicit purchase and potential 
abuse. Opioids are of great potential toxicity to small children if not 
dosed appropriately, especially buprenorphine because of its long half- 
life and high potency.
Pathophysiology
. 
Opioids are well absorbed via multiple routes, 
including the GI tract, which is the most common route of accidental 
overdose in young children. At therapeutic dosing, opioids are typi
-
cally absorbed within a few hours, but absorption may be slowed and 
symptoms prolonged in overdose. Individual opioids cross the blood- 
brain barrier to varying degrees. Opioids all undergo hepatic metabo
-
lism with renal excretion.
Methadone is a lipophilic synthetic opioid with potent agonist effects 
at 
μ
- opioid receptors, leading to both its desired analgesic effects and 
undesired side effects, including sedation, respiratory depression, and 
impaired	GI	motility.	Methadone	is	thought	to	cause	QTc	interval	pro
-
longation through interactions with the human ether- a- go- go–related 
gene (hERG)–encoded potassium rectifier channel. Its duration of 
effect for pain control averages only about 8 hours, whereas the danger
-
ous side effects can occur up to 24 hours from the last dose and longer 
after overdose. Methadone has an average half- life >25 hours, which 
may be extended to >50 hours in overdose.
Suboxone is a combination of buprenorphine, a potent opioid with 
partial agonism at 
μ
- opioid receptors and weak antagonism at 
κ
- opioid 
receptors, and naloxone. Naloxone has poor oral bioavailability but is 
included in the formulation to discourage diversion for IV use, during 
which it can precipitate withdrawal. Suboxone is formulated for buccal 
or sublingual administration; consequently, toddlers can absorb sig
-
nificant amounts of drug even by sucking on a tablet. Buprenorphine 
has an average half- life of 37 hours.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
In children, opioid 
ingestions can manifest with the classic toxidrome of respiratory 
depression, sedation, and miosis. Signs of more severe toxicity can 
include bradycardia, hypotension, and hypothermia. Many opioids 
have clinical features that are unique to their chemical structure (
Table	
94.13
). Even in therapeutic use, methadone is associated with a pro
-
longed	QTc	interval	and	risk	of	torsades	de	pointes.	Accordingly,	an	
ECG should be part of the initial evaluation after ingestion of metha
-
done or any unknown opioid. Many prescription opioids, including 
methadone and buprenorphine, are not detected on routine urine 
opiate screens, although some centers have added a separate urine 
methadone screen. Levels of many drugs can be measured, although 
this is rarely done clinically and is seldom helpful in the acute setting. 
An exception may be in the cases involving concerns about neglect or 
abuse, at which point urine for gas chromatography/mass spectros
-
copy, the legal gold standard, should be sent to confirm and document 
the presence of the drug.
 
Treatment
. 
Patients with significant respiratory depression or 
CNS depression should be treated with the opioid antidote 
naloxone
 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
713
(see 
Table	94.8
). In pediatric patients who are not chronically taking 
opioids, the full reversal dose of 1- 2 mg should be used. In contrast, 
opioid- dependent patients should be treated with smaller initial doses 
(0.04- 0.4 mg
), which can then be repeated as needed to achieve the 
desired clinical response, avoiding abrupt induction of withdrawal. 
Because the half- life of many opioids is much longer than that of nal
-
oxone, patients can require multiple doses of naloxone. These patients 
may benefit from a continuous infusion of naloxone, typically started 
at two thirds of the reversal dose per hour and titrated to maintain an 
adequate respiratory rate and level of consciousness. Patients who have 
ingested methadone should be placed on a cardiac monitor and have 
serial	ECGs	to	monitor	for	the	development	of	a	prolonged	QTc	inter
-
val.	If	a	patient	does	develop	a	prolonged	QTc,	management	includes	
close cardiac monitoring, repletion of electrolytes (potassium, calcium, 
and magnesium), and having a defibrillator readily available should the 
patient develop torsades de pointes.
Given the potential for clinically significant and prolonged toxicity, 
any toddler who has ingested methadone, even if asymptomatic, should 
be admitted to the hospital for at least 24 hours of monitoring. Duration 
of observation after ingestion of other opioids depends on the half- life 
and dose of the agent ingested. All such cases should be discussed with a 
PCC or medical toxicologist before determining disposition.
 
 
β
- Adrenergic Receptor Blockers
. 
β
 Blockers competitively inhibit 
the action of catecholamines at the 
β
- adrenergic receptor. Therapeuti
-
cally, 
β
 blockers are used for a variety of conditions, including hyper
-
tension, coronary artery disease, tachydysrhythmias, anxiety disorders, 
migraines, essential tremor, and hyperthyroidism. Because of its lipo
-
philicity and blockade of fast sodium channels, 
propranolol
 is con
-
sidered to be the most toxic member of the 
β
- blocker class. Overdoses 
of water- soluble 
β
 blockers (e.g., atenolol) are associated with milder 
symptoms.
Pathophysiology
. 
In overdose, 
β
 blockers decrease chronotropy 
and inotropy in addition to slowing conduction through atrioven
-
tricular (AV) nodal tissue. Clinically, these effects are manifested as 
bradycardia, hypotension, and heart block. Patients with reactive 
airway disease can experience bronchospasm as a result of block
-
ade of 
β
2
- mediated bronchodilation. 
β
2
 Blockers interfere with 
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, which can sometimes lead to 
hypoglycemia, especially in patients with poor glycogen stores (e.g., 
toddlers).
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Toxicity	typically	devel
-
ops within 6 hours of ingestion, although it may be delayed after inges
-
tion of sotalol or SR preparations. The most common features of severe 
poisoning are bradycardia and hypotension. Lipophilic agents, includ
-
ing propranolol, can enter the CNS and cause altered mental status, 
coma, and seizures. Overdose of 
β
 blockers with sodium channel–
blocking properties (e.g., propranolol) can cause QRS interval widen
-
ing and ventricular dysrhythmias.
Evaluation after 
β
- blocker overdose should include an ECG, frequent 
reassessments of hemodynamic status, and blood glucose. Serum levels 
of 
β
 blockers are not readily available for routine clinical use and are 
not useful in management of the poisoned patient.
 
Treatment
. 
In addition to supportive care and GI decontamination 
as indicated, 
glucagon
 is theoretically the preferred antidote of choice 
for 
β
- blocker toxicity (see 
Table	94.8
). Glucagon stimulates adenyl
-
ate cyclase and increases levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP) independent of the 
β
- receptor. Glucagon is typically given as 
a bolus and, if this is effective, followed by a continuous infusion. In 
practice, glucagon is often only marginally effective, limited by its pro- 
emetic effects, especially at the high doses typically required. Other 
useful interventions include calcium, vasopressors, and high- dose 
insulin. Seizures are managed with benzodiazepines, and QRS widen
-
ing should be treated with sodium bicarbonate. Lipid emulsion therapy 
(discussed earlier) may be considered in patients with signs of shock 
who do not respond to conventional treatments. Children who ingest 
one or two water- soluble 
β
 blockers are unlikely to develop toxicity and 
can typically be discharged to home if they remain asymptomatic over 
a 6- hour observation period. Children who ingest SR products, highly 
lipid- soluble agents, and sotalol require longer periods of observation 
before safe discharge. Any symptomatic child should be admitted for 
ongoing monitoring and directed therapy.
 
Calcium Channel Blockers
. 
CCBs are used for a variety of thera
-
peutic indications and have the potential to cause severe toxicity, even 
after exploratory ingestions. Specific agents include verapamil, diltia
-
zem, and the dihydropyridines (e.g., amlodipine, nifedipine). Of these, 
diltiazem and verapamil are the most dangerous in overdose because of 
their higher lipophilicity and direct cardiac suppressant effects.
Pathophysiology
. 
CCBs antagonize 
l
- type calcium channels, 
inhibiting calcium influx into myocardial and vascular smooth muscle 
cells. Verapamil works primarily by slowing inotropy and chronotropy 
and in therapeutic dosing has no effect on systemic vascular resistance 
(SVR). Diltiazem has effects both on the heart and the peripheral vas
-
culature. The dihydropyridines exclusively diminish SVR. Verapamil 
and diltiazem can significantly diminish myocardial contractility and 
conduction, with diltiazem also lowering SVR. By contrast, dihydro
-
pyridines will decrease the SVR, leading to vasodilation and reflex 
tachycardia, although this receptor selectivity may be lost after a large 
overdose. Because the same 
l
- type calcium channels blocked by CCBs 
are also on the pancreatic islet cells, any patient significantly poisoned 
with a CCB may develop hyperglycemia.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Overdoses of CCBs 
lead to hypotension, accompanied by bradycardia, normal heart rate, 
or even tachycardia, depending on the agent. Other rhythm distur
-
bances,	including	AV	block,	bundle	branch	blocks,	QT	prolongation,	
and junctional rhythms, may also be seen. A common feature of CCB 
overdose is the patient exhibiting profound hypotension with pre
-
served consciousness.
Initial evaluation should include an ECG, continuous and care
-
ful hemodynamic monitoring, and rapid measurement of serum 
glucose levels. Both the absolute degree of hyperglycemia and the 
percentage increase in serum glucose have been correlated with the 
severity	of	CCB	toxicity	in	adults.	The	development	of	hyperglyce
-
mia can even precede the development of hemodynamic instability. 
Blood levels of CCBs are not readily available and are not useful in 
guiding therapy.
 
Treatment
. 
Once initial supportive care has been instituted, GI 
decontamination should begin with activated charcoal as appropriate. 
WBI may be beneficial in a stable patient after ingestion of an SR prod
-
uct. Calcium channel blockade in the smooth muscles of the GI tract can 
lead to greatly diminished motility; thus any form of GI decontamination 
should be undertaken with careful attention to serial abdominal exams.
Calcium salts, administered through a peripheral IV line as cal
-
cium gluconate or a central line as calcium chloride, help to overcome 
blocked calcium channels. 
High- dose insulin euglycemia therapy
 is 
considered the antidote of choice for CCB toxicity. An initial bolus of 1 
unit/kg of regular insulin is followed by an infusion at 1-10 units/kg/hr 
(see 
Table	94.8
). The main mechanism of high- dose insulin euglycemia 
able 94.13 
 
  Clinical Properties of Select Prescription 
Opioids
CLINICAL EFFECT
OPIOID
QRS widening, sodium 
channel blockade
Propoxyphene
QT widening, potassium 
channel blockade
Methadone
Seizures
Propoxyphene, meperidine
Serotonin syndrome
Meperidine, methadone, tramadol
Hearing loss, ototoxicity
Methadone, hydrocodone
Modified from Nikolaides JK, Thompson TM. Opioids. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS, 
Gausche- Hill M, et al., eds. 
Rosen’s Emergency Medicine,
 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2018, 
Table 156.2
, p. 1944.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

714 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
is to improve the metabolic efficiency of a poisoned heart that needs 
carbohydrates for energy (instead of the usual free fatty acids) but has 
minimal circulating insulin. Blood glucose and serum potassium levels 
should be closely monitored, and supplemental dextrose may be nec
-
essary to maintain euglycemia. Mild hypokalemia may be tolerated, 
as this reflects intracellular shifting of potassium rather than whole- 
body potassium depletion; severe hypokalemia (e.g., K <2.8 mEq/L) is 
treated with IV potassium supplementation.
Additional therapies include judicious IV fluid boluses and vasopres
-
sors (often in very high doses). Cardiac pacing is rarely of value. Lipid 
emulsion therapy (discussed earlier) is a potentially lifesaving inter
-
vention, especially for patients poisoned with the more lipid- soluble 
CCBs, verapamil and diltiazem. In extreme cases an intraaortic balloon 
pump or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) are potential 
treatments. Given the potential for profound and sometimes delayed 
toxicity in toddlers after ingestion of one or two CCB tablets, hospital 
admission and 12- 24 hours of monitoring for all of these patients is 
strongly recommended.
 
α
2
- Adrenergic Agonists
. 
Although originally intended for use as 
antihypertensives, the number of 
clonidine
 and 
guanfacine
 prescrip
-
tions in the pediatric population has greatly increased because of its 
reported efficacy in the management of attention- deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), tic disorders, and other behavioral disorders. With 
this increased use has come a significant rise in pediatric ingestions 
and therapeutic misadventures. Clonidine is available in pill and trans
-
dermal patch forms, while guanfacine is available in pill form.
Pathophysiology
. 
Clonidine, along with the closely related agent 
guanfacine, is a centrally acting 
α
2
- adrenergic receptor agonist with 
a very narrow therapeutic index. Agonism at central 
α
2
 receptors 
decreases sympathetic outflow, producing lethargy, bradycardia, hypo
-
tension,	and	apnea.	Toxicity	can	develop	after	ingestion	of	only	one	pill	
or after sucking on or swallowing a discarded transdermal patch. Even 
a “used” transdermal patch might contain as much as one third to one 
half the original amount of drug.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
The most common 
clinical manifestations of toxicity are lethargy, miosis, and bradycar
-
dia. Hypotension, respiratory depression, and apnea may be seen in 
severe cases. Very early after ingestion, patients may be hypertensive 
in the setting of agonism at peripheral 
α
- receptors and resulting vaso
-
constriction. Symptoms develop relatively soon after ingestion and 
typically resolve within 24 hours. Serum clonidine concentrations are 
not readily available and are of no clinical value in the acute setting. 
Although signs of clinical toxicity are common after clonidine or guan
-
facine overdose, death is extremely unusual.
 
Treatment
. 
Given the potential for significant toxicity, most young 
children warrant referral to a healthcare facility for evaluation after 
unintentional ingestions of 
α
2
- adrenergic agonists. Gastric decon
-
tamination is of minimal value because of the small quantities ingested 
and the rapid onset of serious symptoms. Aggressive supportive care 
is imperative and is the cornerstone of management. Naloxone, often 
in high doses (i.e., 10 mg IV), has shown variable efficacy in treating 
clonidine toxicity. Other potentially useful therapies include atropine, 
IV fluid boluses, and vasopressors. Symptomatic children should be 
admitted to the hospital for close cardiovascular and neurologic moni
-
toring. Also, in a patient receiving chronic clonidine or guanfacine 
therapy, rapid discontinuation of the drug, or even missing one or two 
doses, could lead to potentially dangerous elevations in blood pressure.
 
Digoxin
. 
Digoxin is a cardiac glycoside extracted from the leaves 
of 
Digitalis lanata
. Other natural sources of cardiac glycosides include 
Digitalis purpura
 (foxglove), 
Nerium oleander
 (oleander), 
Convallaria 
majalis
 (lily of the valley), Siberian ginseng, and the 
Bufo marinus
 toad. 
Therapeutically, digoxin is used in the management of heart failure and 
some supraventricular tachydysrhythmias. Acute overdose can occur in 
the setting of dosing errors (especially in younger children), uninten
-
tional or intentional medication ingestion, or exposure to plant mate
-
rial containing digitalis glycosides. Regarding exposure to such plants, 
toxicity is unusual unless the poison is concentrated in the form of a tea. 
Chronic toxicity can result from alteration of the digoxin dose, alteration 
in digoxin clearance as a result of renal impairment, or drug interactions.
Pathophysiology
. 
Digoxin blocks the sodium- potassium adenos
-
ine triphosphatase (Na
+
,K
+
-	ATPase)	pump,	leading	to	intracellular	
loss of K
+
 and gain of Na
+
 and calcium (Ca
2+
). This resulting rise in 
Ca
2+
 available to the contractile myocardium improves inotropy. An 
increase in myocardial automaticity leads to subsequent atrial, nodal, 
and ventricular ectopy. Digoxin also affects nodal conduction, lead
-
ing to a prolonged refractory period, decreased sinus node firing, and 
slowed conduction through the AV node. Impaired Na
+
/K
+
 exchange 
can lead to elevated serum K
+
. Overall, digoxin overdose manifests as 
a combination of slowed or blocked conduction and increased ectopy.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Nausea and vomiting 
are common initial symptoms of acute digoxin toxicity, manifesting 
within 6 hours of overdose. Cardiovascular manifestations include 
bradycardia, heart block, and a wide variety of dysrhythmias. CNS 
manifestations consist of lethargy, confusion, and weakness. Chronic 
toxicity (which is rare in children) is more insidious and may also man
-
ifest as altered mental status and visual disturbances.
Initial assessment should include an ECG, serum digoxin level, 
serum potassium, and kidney function tests. The serum digoxin level 
should be assessed at least 6 hours after ingestion and carefully inter
-
preted in the setting of clinical symptoms, because the digoxin level 
alone does not entirely reflect the severity of intoxication. In acute 
ingestions, serum potassium is an independent marker of morbid
-
ity and mortality, with levels >5 mEq/L predicting poor outcomes. In 
chronic toxicity, serum K
+
 concentration is less useful as a prognostic 
marker and may be altered from concomitant use of diuretics or renal 
dysfunction.
Digoxin has a very narrow therapeutic index. Therapeutic plasma 
digoxin concentrations are 0.5- 2 ng/mL; a level >2 ng/mL is considered 
toxic, and >6 ng/mL is considered potentially fatal (in chronic poison
-
ings). As with all serum levels of intoxicants, one must be careful to 
interpret the number in the context of the scenario of the poisoning 
and the status of the patient. An acutely poisoned patient may have a 
very high serum level and minimal to no symptoms, whereas a patient 
with a chronic or acute- on- chronic poisoning will usually be sicker 
with a lower serum level.
Numerous drug interactions affect plasma digoxin concentrations. 
Medications known to increase serum digoxin concentrations include 
the macrolides, erythromycin and clarithromycin, spironolactone, 
verapamil, amiodarone, and itraconazole.
 
Treatment
. 
Initial treatment includes good general supportive 
care and gastric decontamination with activated charcoal if the inges
-
tion was recent. An antidote for digoxin, digoxin- specific antibody 
fragments (Fab: Digibind or DigiFab) is available (see 
Table	94.8
). 
Fab fragments bind free digoxin in both the intravascular and the 
interstitial spaces to form a pharmacologically inactive complex that 
is subsequently eliminated renally. Indications for administration of 
Fab fragments in children are listed in 
Table	94.14
. Atropine is poten
-
tially useful in managing symptomatic bradycardia. Although dogma 
states that patients on digoxin with severe hyperkalemia and QRS 
widening on the ECG should not receive calcium salts, this has not 
been supported in the literature. Once stabilized, consultation with a 
cardiologist is recommended in the management of patients receiv
-
ing chronic digoxin therapy, because administration of Fab fragments 
can lead to recurrence of the patient’s underlying dysrhythmias or 
dysfunction.
 
Iron
. 
Historically, iron was a common cause of childhood poison
-
ing deaths. However, preventive measures such as childproof packaging 
have significantly decreased the rates of serious iron toxicity in young 
children. Iron- containing products remain widely available, with the 
most potentially toxic being adult iron preparations and prenatal vita
-
mins. The severity of an exposure is related to the amount of 
elemen
-
tal iron
 ingested. Ferrous sulfate contains 20% elemental iron, ferrous 
gluconate 12%, and ferrous fumarate 33%. Multivitamin preparations 
and children’s vitamins rarely contain enough elemental iron to cause 
significant toxicity. Furthermore, nonionic forms of iron, carbonyl iron 
and iron polysaccharide, also do not cause significant toxicity.
Pathophysiology
. 
Iron is directly corrosive to the GI mucosa, 
leading to hematemesis, melena, ulceration, and potential perforation. 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
715
Early iron- induced hypotension is caused by massive volume losses, 
increased permeability of capillary membranes, and vasodilation 
mediated by free iron. Iron accumulates in tissues, including the 
Kupffer cells of the liver and myocardial cells, leading to hepatotoxicity, 
coagulopathy, and cardiac dysfunction. Metabolic acidosis develops in 
the setting of hypotension, hypovolemia, and iron’s direct interference 
with oxidative phosphorylation and the Krebs cycle. Pediatric patients 
who ingest >40 mg/kg of elemental iron should be referred to medical 
care for evaluation, although moderate to severe toxicity is typically 
seen with ingestions >60 mg/kg.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Iron toxicity is 
described in five often- overlapping stages (
Table	94.15
). Patients who 
do not develop GI symptoms within 6 hours of ingestion are unlikely to 
develop serious toxicity. Symptomatic patients and patients with a large 
exposure by history should have serum iron levels drawn 4- 6 hours 
after ingestion. Serum iron concentrations of <350 
μ
g/dL 4- 8 hours 
after ingestion suggest a low risk of significant toxicity, concentrations 
of 350- 500 
μ
g/dL suggest moderate toxicity, and concentrations of >500 
μ
g/dL indicate that significant toxicity is likely. Additional laboratory 
evaluation in the ill patient should include arterial or venous blood gas, 
lactate, CBC, serum glucose level, liver transaminases, and coagulation 
parameters. Careful attention should be paid to the patient’s hemody
-
namic status. An abdominal radiograph may reveal the presence of 
iron tablets, although not all formulations of iron are radiopaque.
 
Treatment
. 
Close clinical monitoring, combined with aggressive 
supportive and symptomatic care, is essential to the management of 
iron poisoning. Activated charcoal does not adsorb iron, and WBI 
remains the decontamination strategy of choice. 
Deferoxamine
, a spe
-
cific chelator of iron, is the antidote for moderate to severe iron intoxi
-
cation (see 
Table	94.8
). Indications for deferoxamine treatment include 
a serum iron concentration >500 
μ
g/dL or moderate to severe symp
-
toms of toxicity (e.g., acidosis), regardless of serum iron concentration. 
Deferoxamine is preferably given by continuous IV infusion at 15 mg/
kg/hr
. Hypotension is a common side effect of deferoxamine infusion 
and is managed by slowing the rate of the infusion and administering 
fluids and vasopressors as needed. Prolonged deferoxamine infusion 
(>24 hours) has been associated with pulmonary toxicity (ARDS) and 
Yersinia
 sepsis. The deferoxamine- iron complex can color the urine 
reddish (“vin rosé”), although the degree of this coloration should not 
guide therapy. Deferoxamine is typically continued until clinical symp
-
toms and acidosis resolve. Consultation with a PCC or medical toxi
-
cologist can yield guidelines for discontinuing deferoxamine.
 
 
Oral medications used in the management of type 2 diabetes include 
sulfonylureas, biguanides (e.g., metformin), thiazolidinediones, and 
meglitinides. Of these, only the sulfonylureas and meglitinides have the 
potential to cause profound hypoglycemia in both diabetic and nondi
-
abetic patients. These classes of medications are widely prescribed and 
thus readily available. In toddlers, unintentional ingestion of a single 
sulfonylurea tablet can lead to significant toxicity.
Pathophysiology
. 
Sulfonylureas work primarily by enhancing 
endogenous insulin secretion. In binding to the sulfonylurea receptor, 
these drugs induce closure of K
+
 channels, leading to membrane depo
-
larization, opening of Ca
2+
 channels, and stimulation of Ca
2+
- mediated 
insulin release. Even in therapeutic use, the duration of hypoglycemic 
action can last up to 24 hours.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Hypoglycemia and 
symptoms associated with hypoglycemia are the primary clinical mani
-
festations of sulfonylurea toxicity. These signs and symptoms can include 
diaphoresis, tachycardia, lethargy, irritability, coma, seizures, and even 
focal neurologic findings. As with other hyperinsulinemic states, sulfo
-
nylurea overdoses are associated with a nonketotic hypoglycemia. In the 
majority of patients, hypoglycemia develops within 6 hours of ingestion 
but	can	be	delayed	up	to	16-	18	hours	after	ingestion.	Toddlers	are	par
-
ticularly susceptible to hypoglycemia during an overnight fast.
 
Treatment
. 
Patients with symptomatic hypoglycemia should be 
promptly treated with dextrose. In patients with mild symptoms, oral 
dextrose may be sufficient. However, patients with severe symptoms 
or profound hypoglycemia should be treated with a bolus of IV dex
-
trose. Continuous dextrose infusions and repeated IV dextrose boluses 
should be avoided, if possible, because this can stimulate further insu
-
lin release and lead to recurrent and prolonged hypoglycemia. Instead, 
the preferred antidote for persistent (i.e., requiring 
≥
2 doses of IV dex
-
trose) sulfonylurea toxicity is 
octreotide
 (see 
Table	94.8
). Octreotide is 
a somatostatin analog that inhibits insulin release. Octreotide is given 
IV or subcutaneously (SC), typically in doses of 1- 2 
μ
g/kg (50- 100 
μ
g 
in teens or adults) every 6- 8 hour
s.
Given the potential for significant hypoglycemia, toddlers with 
witnessed or suspected sulfonylurea ingestions should be admit
-
ted to the hospital for serial glucose measurements for at least 12 
hours, including an overnight fast. Patients of any age who develop 
hypoglycemia are also candidates for admission, given the prolonged 
duration of hypoglycemic activity with these medications. Prophy
-
lactic IV dextrose infusions are not recommended because they can 
mask the symptoms of toxicity and stimulate further insulin secre
-
tion. Patients who require IV dextrose and/or octreotide should be 
monitored until they can demonstrate euglycemia for at least 8 hours 
off all therapy.
able. 94.14 
 
  Indications for Administration of Digoxin 
Antibody Fragments in Children
Ingestion	of	>0.1-	0.3	mg/kg	
or
 steady- state digoxin concentration 
 
>5	ng/mL	
PLUS
 one of the following:
	•		Rapidly	progressive	symptoms
	•		Signs	of	cardioactive	steroid	intoxication
	•		Potentially	life-	threatening	dysrhythmias	or	conduction	blocks
	•		Serum	potassium	concentration	>5	mEq/L
Co- ingestion of other cardiotoxic drugs with additive or synergistic 
toxicity
Ingestion of plant known to contain cardioactive steroids 
plus
 severe 
dysrhythmias
Modified from Cole JB. Cardiovascular drugs. In: Walls RM, Hockberger RS, Gausche- 
Hill M, et al., eds. 
Rosen’s Emergency Medicine,
 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, 
Box 147.4
, p. 1879.
Table 94.15 
 
  Clinical Manifestations of Iron Toxicity After 
Acute Overdose
PHASE
CLINICAL FEATURES
1. Gastrointestinal (6 hr)
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Hematemesis
Hematochezia
2. Latent (6- 24 hr)
Resolution of GI symptoms
Tachycardia
Acidosis
Depressed mental status
3. Systemic (12- 24 hr)
Return of GI symptoms
Acidosis
Leukocytosis
Coagulopathy
Renal failure
Lethargy or coma
Cardiovascular collapse
4. Hepatic (2- 5 days)
Fulminant liver failure
Coagulopathy
5. Obstructive (3- 6 wk)
Pyloric or bowel scarring
Obstruction
GI, Gastrointestinal.
Modified from Theobald JL, Mycyk MB. Iron and heavy metals. In: Walls RM, 
Hockberger RS, Gausche- Hill M, et al., eds. 
Rosen’s Emergency Medicine,
 9th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018, 
Table 151.2
, p. 1913.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

716 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
With the increasing numbers of adolescents with type 2 diabetes, 
pediatricians should be familiar with the toxic effects of 
metformin
 as 
well. Although metformin does not cause hypoglycemia, its association 
with lactic acidosis is well documented (metformin- associated lactic 
acidosis [MALA]). This state typically arises after a large overdose in 
which the agent interferes with the liver’s ability to clear lactic acid. 
Dangerously high serum lactate levels can result, leading to hemody
-
namic instability. Hemodialysis is usually the best option for patients 
with severe MALA.
 
Psychiatric Medications: Antidepressants
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; e.g., fluoxetine, sertra
-
line, paroxetine, citalopram) are the most commonly prescribed class 
of antidepressants. This trend largely results from their wide therapeu
-
tic index and more favorable side effect profile compared with older 
agents	such	as	tricyclic	antidepressants	(TCAs;	amitriptyline,	clo
-
mipramine, desipramine, doxepin, nortriptyline, imipramine) and 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Other agents include the 
serotonin- norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs; e.g., venlafax
-
ine) and atypical antidepressants (e.g., bupropion).
Tricyclic Antidepressants
. 
Although now prescribed less often 
for	depression,	TCAs	remain	in	use	for	a	variety	of	other	conditions,	
including chronic pain syndromes, enuresis, ADHD, and obsessive- 
compulsive	disorder.	TCAs	can	cause	significant	toxicity	in	children,	
even with ingestion of one or two pills (10- 20 mg/kg).
Pathophysiology
. 
TCAs	achieve	their	desired	antidepressant	
effects primarily through blockade of norepinephrine and serotonin 
reuptake.	TCAs	have	complex	interactions	with	other	receptor	types.	
Antagonism at muscarinic acetylcholine receptors leads to clinical 
features of the anticholinergic toxidrome. Antagonism at peripheral 
α
- receptors leads to hypotension and syncope. Key to the toxicity of 
TCAs	is	their	ability	to	block	fast	sodium	channels,	leading	to	impaired	
cardiac conduction and arrhythmias.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Cardiovascular and 
CNS	symptoms	dominate	the	clinical	presentation	of	TCA	toxicity.	
Symptoms typically develop within 1- 2 hours of ingestion, and seri
-
ous toxicity usually manifests within 6 hours of ingestion. Patients 
can have an extremely rapid progression from mild symptoms to 
life- threatening dysrhythmias. Patients often develop features of 
anticholinergic toxidrome
, including delirium, mydriasis, dry 
mucous membranes, tachycardia, hyperthermia, urinary retention, 
and slow GI motility. CNS toxicity can include lethargy, coma, myo
-
clonic jerks, and seizures. Sinus tachycardia is the most common 
cardiovascular manifestation of toxicity; however, patients can also 
develop widening of the QRS complex, premature ventricular con
-
tractions, and ventricular dysrhythmias. Refractory hypotension is 
a poor prognostic indicator and is the most common cause of death 
in	TCA	overdose.
An ECG can help determine the diagnosis and prognosis of the 
TCA-	poisoned	patient	(
Fig. 94.2
; see 
Table	94.7
). A QRS duration 
>100 msec identifies patients who are at risk for seizures and cardiac 
arrhythmias. An R wave in lead aVR of 
≥
3 mm is also an independent 
predictor of toxicity. Both ECG parameters are superior to measured 
serum	TCA	concentrations	for	identifying	patients	at	risk	for	serious	
toxicity, and obtaining levels is rarely helpful in management of the 
acutely ill patient.
 
Treatment
. 
Initial attention should be directed to supporting vital 
functions, including airway and ventilation as needed. Gastric decon
-
tamination can be accomplished with activated charcoal in patients 
who	are	alert	and	cooperative	without	clinical	signs	of	toxicity.	Treating	
clinicians should obtain an ECG as soon as possible and follow serial 
ECGs to monitor for progression of toxicity. The four primary effects 
described next may be seen at the bedside.
 
1.
 
Altered Mental State
. 
TCA-	poisoned	patients	can	become	
deeply comatose relatively quickly, so careful and prompt attention 
to the airway and placement of an endotracheal tube is of paramount 
importance.
 
2.
 
Widened QRS on ECG
. 
TCAs,	as	well	as	other	agents	(e.g.,	
diphenhydramine, cocaine), block the fast Na
+
 channels on the myo
-
cardial cells, slowing the upstroke of the QRS complex. Because the 
effect on Na
+
 channels is greatest within the first 6 hours, frequent 
ECGs (i.e., every 20- 30 minutes) during this period are important. As 
the QRS approaches 160 msec, the risk of the patient developing mono
-
morphic ventricular tachycardia rises to 30%. Sodium, usually in the 
form of sodium bicarbonate, is the antidote of choice. 
Indications for 
sodium bicarbonate include a QRS duration 
≥
100 msec, ventricular dys
-
rhythmias, and hypotension
. Multiple bolus doses of sodium bicarbon
-
ate, 1- 2 mEq/kg e
ach, may be needed to narrow the QRS to <100 msec. 
Some prefer then to place the patient on an infusion of sodium bicar
-
bonate, but this may not be necessary if the QRS is carefully monitored 
after the initial doses and repeat bolus dosing is provided as needed 
during the first 6- 12 hours. Hypertonic (3%) saline and/or lipid emul
-
sion therapy may be beneficial in refractory cases.
 
3.
 
Hypotension
. 
A direct- acting vasopressor such as norepineph
-
rine or epinephrine is the agent of choice. Boluses of IV crystalloid 
fluids should be used with caution to prevent fluid overload.
 
4.
 
Seizures
. 
Seizures are relatively common and likely the result 
of multiple factors, including increased synaptic monoamines, 
sodium channel inhibition, and GABA receptor antagonism. Sei
-
zures are typically brief and should be treated with agents targeting 
the GABA- receptor complex in the brain. Benzodiazepines are the 
agent of choice.
Asymptomatic children should receive appropriate decontamination 
and have continuous cardiac monitoring and serial ECGs for at least 
6 hours after exposure. If any manifestations of toxicity develop, the 
child should be admitted to a monitored setting. Children who remain 
Fig. 94.2
 Electrocardiographic findings in tricyclic antidepressant toxicity. Note the tachycardia, widened QRS interval (144 msec), and prominent 
R wave in lead aVR. These findings are consistent with blockade of fast sodium channels.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
717
completely asymptomatic with normal serial ECGs may be candidates 
for discharge after that monitoring period.
 
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors
. 
In overdose, SSRIs 
are	considerably	less	toxic	than	TCAs.	SSRIs	are	unlikely	to	cause	
significant toxicity in exploratory ingestions. Some data suggest that 
initiating SSRI therapy is associated with an increased risk of suicidal 
ideation and behavior (see 
Chapter 40
).
Pathophysiology
. 
SSRIs selectively block the reuptake of sero
-
tonin	in	the	CNS.	In	contrast	to	TCAs	and	atypical	antidepressants,	
SSRIs do not directly interact with other receptors.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Although seen more 
often after therapeutic use or overdose of several serotonergic agents 
in combination, 
serotonin syndrome
 has also been described in 
ingestion of SSRIs alone (
Table	94.16
). Clinically, serotonin syndrome 
describes a spectrum of altered mental status, autonomic instability, 
fever, and neuromuscular hyperactivity (hyperreflexia, tremors, clonus 
in lower extremities > upper extremities) (
Table	94.17
). One or all of 
these signs may be present to varying degrees.
In overdose, the principal clinical manifestations of toxicity are 
sedation and tachycardia. Cardiac conduction abnormalities (primar
-
ily	QTc	prolongation)	and	seizures	have	been	described	in	significant	
overdoses, especially after ingestions of citalopram. An ECG should 
be part of the initial assessment after SSRI ingestion. Serum cre
-
atine kinase (CK) levels are almost always elevated in a patient with 
clinically significant serotonin syndrome. The differential diagnosis 
includes neuroleptic malignant syndrome and malignant hyperther
-
mia (
Table	94.18
).
 
Treatment
. 
Initial management includes a careful assessment 
for signs and symptoms of serotonin syndrome and an ECG. Most 
patients simply require supportive care and observation until their 
mental status improves and tachycardia, if present, resolves. Manage
-
ment of serotonin syndrome is directed by the severity of symptoms; 
possible therapeutic interventions include benzodiazepines in mild 
cases and intubation, sedation, and paralysis in patients with severe 
manifestations (e.g., significant hyperthermia). Because agonism at the 
5-	HT
2A
 serotonin receptor is thought to be primarily responsible for 
the	development	of	serotonin	syndrome,	use	of	the	5-	HT
2A
 receptor 
antagonist cyproheptadine has been considered a possible antidote; 
the efficacy of cyproheptadine in managing serotonin syndrome is not 
well- supported by the available literature. Furthermore, cyprohepta
-
dine should be used with caution when the diagnosis is unclear, as it 
can worsen anticholinergic toxicity.
 
Atypical Antidepressants
. 
The atypical antidepressant class 
includes agents such as venlafaxine and duloxetine (SNRIs), bupropion 
(dopamine, norepinephrine, and some serotonin reuptake blockade), 
and trazodone (serotonin reuptake blockade and peripheral 
α
- receptor 
antagonism). The variable receptor affinities of these agents lead to 
some distinctions in their clinical manifestations and management.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
In overdose, 
venlafax
-
ine
 and other SNRIs have been associated with cardiac conduction 
defects,	including	QRS	and	QTc	prolongation,	and	seizures	(typi
-
cally within a few hours of ingestion). 
Bupropion
 warrants special 
consideration because it is one of the most common etiologies of 
toxicant- induced seizures in the United States. After ingestion of SR or 
extended- release (ER) preparations of bupropion, seizures can occur 
as late as 18- 20 hours after ingestion. In addition, bupropion can cause 
tachycardia,	agitation,	and	QRS	and	QTc	prolongation.	These	cardiac	
effects are thought to result from a reduction in cardiac intracellular 
coupling caused by inhibition at gap junctions in the heart. Mortality 
results from not only status epilepticus but also the cardiac conduc
-
tion disturbances causing ventricular tachycardia and dysrhythmias. 
In addition to sedation and signs of serotonin excess, trazodone over
-
dose may be associated with hypotension from blockade of peripheral 
α
- receptors.
 
Treatment
. 
Management is directed at clinical signs and symptoms. 
QRS	and	QTc	interval	prolongation	after	bupropion	poisoning	is	typi
-
cally resistant to the standard treatments of sodium bicarbonate and 
magnesium. Seizures are often brief and self- limited but can be treated 
with benzodiazepines if necessary. A patient poisoned with bupropion 
who shows unstable hemodynamics with prolonged ECG intervals or 
persistent seizure activity after the appropriate therapies should be dis
-
cussed with a toxicologist for possible lipid emulsion therapy. Because 
of the potential for delayed seizures, asymptomatic patients who have 
ingested an SR preparation of bupropion should be admitted to a mon
-
itored	setting	for	at	least	20-	24	hours.	Trazodone-	associated	hypoten
-
sion typically responds to fluids, though it can require vasopressors in 
extreme cases.
 
Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors
. 
Although now rarely used 
therapeutically, MAOIs remain important agents given their potential 
for serious and delayed toxicity. Ingestions of only one or two pills (6 
mg/kg) are associated with toxicity in children. Clinical manifesta
-
tions initially include hypertension, hyperthermia, tachycardia, muscle 
rigidity, and seizures, followed up to 24 hours later by hemodynamic 
instability and cardiovascular collapse. 
Any child who ingests a MAOI 
should be admitted to a monitored setting for at least 24 hours, regard
-
less of symptoms.
 Management includes blood pressure control, cooling 
and benzodiazepines for hyperthermia, serial monitoring of CK and 
renal function, and fluid and vasopressor therapy for hemodynamic 
instability.
 
  
Clinicians are increasingly prescribing antipsychotic medications in 
the pediatric population. Antipsychotics are usually classified as either 
typical or atypical. In general, typical agents are associated with more 
side effects and toxicity than the atypical agents.
able 94.16 
 
  Drugs Associated with Serotonin Syndrome
DRUG TYPE
DRUGS
Selective serotonin 
 
reuptake inhibitors
Sertraline, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, 
 
paroxetine, citalopram, escitalopram
Antidepressant drugs
Trazodone, nefazodone, buspirone, 
 
clomipramine, venlafaxine, 
 
amitriptyline, nortriptyline
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors
Phenelzine, moclobemide, clorgyline, 
isocarboxazid
Anticonvulsants
Valproate
Analgesics
Meperidine, fentanyl, tramadol, 
 
pentazocine
Antiemetic agents
Ondansetron, granisetron, 
 
metoclopramide
Antimigraine drugs
Sumatriptan
Bariatric medications
Sibutramine
Antibiotics
Linezolid (a monoamine oxidase inhibitor), 
ritonavir (through inhibition of 
 
cytochrome P450 enzyme isoform 3A4)
Nonprescription cough 
and cold remedies
Dextromethorphan
Drugs of abuse
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine 
 
(MDMA, “ecstasy”), lysergic 
 
acid diethylamide (LSD), 
5- methoxydiisopropyltryptamine (“foxy 
methoxy”), Syrian rue (contains harmine 
and harmaline, both monoamine 
 
oxidase inhibitors)
Dietary supplements and 
herbal products
Tryptophan, 
Hypericum perforatum
 
 
(St. John’s wort), 
Panax ginseng
 (ginseng)
Other
Lithium
From Boyer EW, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. 
N Engl J Med
. 2005;352:1112–
1120.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

718 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Pathophysiology
. 
Typical,
 or “traditional,” antipsychotics (halo
-
peridol, droperidol, thioridazine, chlorpromazine, fluphenazine) are 
characterized by their antagonism at D
2
 dopamine receptors. In thera
-
peutic use, these agents are associated with extrapyramidal symptoms, 
tardive dyskinesia, and, rarely, development of 
neuroleptic malignant 
syndrome (NMS)
 (see 
Table	94.18
). The 
atypical
 agents (aripiprazole, 
clozapine, quetiapine, risperidone, ziprasidone) were developed with 
relatively less dopamine (D
2
- receptor) antagonism in the nigrostria
-
tum to avoid these side effects and improve their efficacy in managing 
the “negative” symptoms of schizophrenia. Instead, these agents have 
complex and varied interactions with multiple receptor types, includ
-
ing 
α
- receptors, serotonin receptors, muscarinic acetylcholine recep
-
tors, and histamine receptors.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Typical	antipsychotic	
toxicity	usually	includes	sedation,	tachycardia,	and	QTc	prolongation.	
Patients can present with acute dystonia, akathisia, and NMS, although 
these are seen less frequently in acute overdoses than in therapeutic 
use. The phenothiazines (e.g., thioridazine) can cause widening of the 
QRS interval from blockade of fast sodium channels. Clinically, NMS 
can be difficult to distinguish from serotonin syndrome.
Although the presentation of atypical antipsychotic toxicity can vary 
based on the receptor affinities of the specific agent, sedation, tachy
-
cardia,	and	QTc	prolongation	are	common.	Peripheral	
α
- receptor 
blockade (e.g., with quetiapine) is associated with hypotension. In 
therapeutic use, clozapine is associated with agranulocytosis. Atypi
-
cal antipsychotics that antagonize muscarinic acetylcholine receptors 
(e.g., olanzapine, quetiapine) may cause symptoms of anticholinergic 
toxidrome.
Diagnostic testing should include an ECG. Patients with hyperther
-
mia or muscle rigidity should have a serum CK level sent to monitor 
Table 94.18 
 
  Signs and Symptoms of Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome (NMS)/Serotonin Syndrome/Malignant Hyperthermia
CLINICAL FEATURES
NMS
SEROTONIN SYNDROME
MALIGNANT HYPERTHERMIA
Triggering agent
Neuroleptic
Proserotonergic agent
Succinylcholine or inhaled anesthetic
Onset
Slow (hours to days)
Fast (minutes to hours)
Very fast to fast (minutes to hours)
Duration
Long (days to weeks)
Short (1- 2 days)
Short (1- 3 days)
Agitation
Sometimes
Yes
No
Confusion
Yes
Sometimes
Unusual
Hyperactivity
No
Yes
No
Bradykinesia/stupor
Yes
No
Unusual
Myoclonus
No
Yes
No
Shivering
No
Yes/sometimes
No
Tremor
Sometimes
Yes
No
Pupils
Mid- sized
Large
Not specific
Hyperreflexia
No
Yes (especially lower extremities)
No
Rigidity
Severe
Sometimes
Severe
Rigidity type
Extrapyramidal (lead pipe)
Pyramidal (clasp- knife)
Generalized
Hyperpyrexia
Yes
Yes
Severe
Tachypnea
Yes
Yes
Yes
Tachycardia
Yes
Yes
Yes (severe)
Hypertension
Sometimes
Yes
Sometimes
Leukocytosis
Yes
Uncommon
Not typical
Elevated creatine phosphokinase
Severe
Mild
Severe
Adapted from Gillman PK. The serotonin syndrome and its treatment. 
J Psychopharmacol
 1999;13:100–109; Gillman K; Serotonin toxicity www.psychotropical.com/serotonin- toxicity; 
and Wappler F, Fiege M, Schulte am Esch J. Pathophysiological role of the serotonin system in malignant hyperthermia. 
Br J Anaesth
. 2001;87(5):794–798.
Table 94.17 
 
  Spectrum of Symptoms of Serotonergic Toxicity
SEVERITY
NEUROMUSCULAR EXCITATION
ALTERED MENTAL STATUS
AUTONOMIC DYSFUNCTION
Mild
Hyperreflexia
Tremor
Myoclonus
Anxiety
Restlessness
Insomnia
Diaphoresis
Mydriasis
Tachycardia
Moderate
Opsoclonus
Spontaneous or inducible clonus
Agitation
Hypertension
Hyperthermia	(<40°C	[<104°F])
Hyperactive bowel sounds
Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting
Severe
Rigidity
Respiratory failure
Tonic- clonic seizure
Coma
Delirium
Confusion
Severe hyperthermia (
≥
40°C [
≥
104°F])
Dynamic blood pressure
Adapted from Wang RZ, Vashistha V, Kaur S, Houchens NW. Serotonin syndrome: Preventing, recognizing, and treating it. 
Clev Clinic J Med
. 2016;83(11):810–817, 
Table 2
, p. 812.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
719
for possible rhabdomyolysis. CBC is indicated in patients with fever to 
evaluate for neutropenia. Antipsychotic levels are not readily available 
and are not helpful in managing acute poisoning.
 
Management
. 
Initial management involves assessing and sup
-
porting vital functions. In some patients, CNS depression may be so 
profound as to require intubation for airway control. Acute dystonia 
is treated with diphenhydramine and benztropine. Management of 
NMS includes aggressive supportive care, IV fluids, active cooling, 
benzodiazepines, and bromocriptine or dantrolene in severe cases. 
QTc	prolongation	is	managed	with	repletion	of	electrolytes	(especially	
calcium, magnesium, and potassium), continuous cardiac monitoring, 
prevention of bradycardia (overdrive pacing, isoproterenol, atropine), 
and defibrillation if the patient develops torsades de pointes. Delirium 
associated with anticholinergic toxicity may be managed with benzo
-
diazepines, and a specific antidote (physostigmine) can be considered 
in consultation with a medical toxicologist (see 
Table	94.8
). Seizures 
typically are well controlled with benzodiazepines. Hypotension usu
-
ally responds to boluses of IV fluids, although vasopressor therapy is 
necessary in some patients.
 
Household Products
Caustics
Caustics include acids and alkalis as well as a few common oxidizing 
agents (see 
Chapter 373
). Strong acids and alkalis can produce severe 
injury even in small- volume ingestions.
Pathophysiology
. 
Alkalis
 produce a 
liquefaction necrosis,
 allow
-
ing further tissue penetration of the toxin and setting the stage for pos
-
sible perforation. 
Acids
 produce a 
coagulative necrosis,
 which limits 
further tissue penetration, although perforation can still occur. The 
severity of the corrosive injury depends on the pH and concentration 
of the product and the length of contact time with the product. Agents 
with a pH of <2 or >12 are most likely to produce significant injury.
Clinical Manifestations
. 
Ingestion of caustic materials can pro
-
duce injury to the oral mucosa, posterior pharynx, vocal cords, esopha
-
gus, and stomach. Patients can have significant esophageal injury even 
in the absence of visible oral burns. Symptoms include pain, drooling, 
vomiting, abdominal pain, and difficulty swallowing or refusal to swal
-
low. Laryngeal injury can manifest as stridor and respiratory distress, 
necessitating intubation. In the most severe cases, patients can present 
in shock after perforation of a hollow viscus. Circumferential burns of 
the esophagus are likely to cause strictures when they heal, which can 
require repeated dilation or surgical correction and long- term follow-
 up for neoplastic changes in adulthood. Caustic exposures on the skin 
or in the eye can cause significant tissue damage.
 
Treatment
. 
Initial treatment of caustic exposures includes thor
-
ough removal of the product from the skin or eye by flushing with 
water. 
Emesis and lavage are contraindicated
. Activated charcoal should 
not be used because it does not bind these agents, interferes with 
endoscopy, and can predispose the patient to vomiting and subsequent 
aspiration. Stridor or other signs of respiratory distress should alert 
the provider to the need for a thorough evaluation of the airway for 
potential intubation or surgical airway management. Endoscopy can 
be performed within 12- 24 hours of ingestion in 
symptomatic
 patients 
or those with suspected injury based on history and known character
-
istics of the ingested product. The role of endoscopy is purely diagnos
-
tic and is contraindicated in patients with severe oropharyngeal injury 
with edema and necrosis, evidence of perforation, respiratory distress, 
or hemodynamic instability, as these patients instead require imme
-
diate surgical consultation. Expectant management with a period of 
nothing by mouth (NPO) and proton pump inhibitor therapy is likely 
appropriate for most 
asymptomatic
 patients. Corticosteroids or pro
-
phylactic antibiotics are not beneficial.
 

Cholinesterase- Inhibiting Insecticides
. 
The most commonly used 
insecticides in agriculture are 
organophosphates
 and 
carbamates
; 
both are inhibitors of cholinesterase enzymes: acetylcholinesterase 
(AChE), pseudocholinesterase, and erythrocyte AChE. Most pediatric 
poisonings occur as the result of unintentional exposure to insecticides 
in and around the home or farm. The chemical warfare weapons known 
as “nerve agents” are also organophosphate compounds with a similar 
mechanism of action but much greater potency.
Pathophysiology
. 
Organophosphates and carbamates produce 
toxicity by binding to and inhibiting AChE, preventing the degrada
-
tion of acetylcholine (ACh) and resulting in its accumulation at nerve 
synapses. If left untreated, organophosphates form an irreversible bond 
to AChE, permanently inactivating the enzyme. This process, called 
aging,
 occurs over a variable period, depending on the characteris
-
tics of the specific organophosphate. A period of weeks to months is 
required to regenerate inactivated enzymes. In contrast, carbamates 
form a temporary bond with the enzymes, typically allowing reactiva
-
tion of AChE within 24 hours.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Clinical manifestations 
of organophosphate and carbamate toxicity relate to ACh accumulation 
at peripheral nicotinic and muscarinic synapses and in the CNS. Symp
-
toms of carbamate toxicity are usually less severe than those seen with 
organophosphates. A commonly used mnemonic for the symptoms of 
cholinergic excess at muscarinic receptors is 
DUMBBELS
: diarrhea/
defecation, urination, miosis, bronchorrhea/bronchospasm, brady
-
cardia, emesis, lacrimation, and salivation. Nicotinic signs and symp
-
toms include muscle weakness, fasciculation, tremors, hypoventilation 
(diaphragm weakness), hypertension, tachycardia, and dysrhythmias. 
Severe manifestations include coma, seizures, shock, arrhythmias, and 
respiratory failure.
Diagnosis of poisoning is based primarily on history and physical 
exam findings. Red blood cell cholinesterase and pseudocholinesterase 
activity levels can be measured in the laboratory. These are only help
-
ful when compared with the patient’s known baseline. As such, these 
assessments are typically limited to farmworkers undergoing ongoing 
occupational surveillance.
 
Treatment
. 
Basic decontamination should be performed, includ
-
ing washing all exposed skin with soap and water and immediately 
removing all clothing. Activated charcoal is unlikely to be of benefit 
because these are liquids that are rapidly absorbed. Basic supportive 
care should be provided, including fluid and electrolyte replacement, 
intubation, and ventilation if necessary. The use of succinylcholine for 
rapid sequence intubation should be avoided because the same cho
-
linesterase enzymes that are poisoned metabolize this neuromuscular 
blocking agent, leading to prolonged paralysis.
Two	antidotes	are	useful	in	treating	cholinesterase	inhibitor	poi
-
soning: atropine and pralidoxime (see 
Table	94.8
). 
Atropine
, which 
antagonizes the muscarinic ACh receptor, is useful for both organo
-
phosphate and carbamate intoxication. Often, large doses of atropine 
must be administered by intermittent bolus or continuous infusion 
to control symptoms. Atropine dosing is primarily targeted to drying 
the respiratory secretions. 
Pralidoxime
 breaks the bond between the 
organophosphate and the enzyme, reactivating AChE. Pralidoxime is 
only effective if it is used before the bond ages and becomes permanent. 
Pralidoxime is not necessary for carbamate poisonings because the 
bond between the insecticide and the enzyme degrades spontaneously.
Without treatment, symptoms of organophosphate poisoning can 
persist for weeks, requiring continuous supportive care. Even with 
treatment, some patients develop a delayed polyneuropathy and a 
range of chronic neuropsychiatric symptoms.
 
Pyrethrins and Pyrethroids
. 
Pyrethrins are derived from the 
chrysanthemum flower and, along with synthetic derivatives, pyre
-
throids, are the most used pesticides in the home. Although >1,000 
pyrethrins and pyrethroids exist, <20 are available in the United 
States, with 
permethrin
 being the most common. Exposure to these 
compounds occurs by inhalation, dermal absorption, or ingestion. 
Ingestion is the predominant route and typically occurs by eating con
-
taminated foods. Permethrin is also a prescribed medication for the 
treatment of scabies and lice.
Pathophysiology
. 
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids prolong the open 
state of the voltage- gated Na
+
 channel conduction, which is the main 
mechanism resulting in its pesticide activity. Pyrethrins have minimal 
toxicity in mammals because of rapid metabolism, higher affinity for 
the insect Na
+
 channel, and decreased activity at higher temperatures 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

720 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
seen in warm- blooded animals. Because pyrethroids were specifically 
manufactured to be more stable in the environment, they have a higher 
likelihood of toxicity.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Pyrethrin exposures 
can lead to allergic reactions ranging from dermatitis to urticaria to 
anaphylaxis. Acute pyrethroid exposure can result in headache, nau
-
sea, dizziness, tremors, ataxia, choreoathetosis, loss of consciousness, 
and seizures. The severity of the symptoms depends on the magnitude 
of the exposure. Reports of acute lung injury have also occurred after 
pyrethroid exposures, although this is likely from the other compo
-
nents of the insecticide, such as surfactants and solvents. Paresthesias 
limited to the cutaneous exposure area can also occur after a dermal 
exposure. Chronic exposures have not been shown to result in any 
clinical manifestations. Although one can test for urinary pyrethroid 
metabolites, this is only useful for monitoring occupational exposure 
and has no role in the acute exposure.
 
Treatment
. 
Initial treatment should focus on decontamination, 
which involves removing all clothing and irrigation of exposed areas. 
Allergic reactions are treated with oral antihistamines and topical cor
-
ticosteroids. Systemic toxicity should be treated with excellent support
-
ive care, using benzodiazepines for tremors and seizures.
 
Hydrocarbons
Hydrocarbons include a wide array of chemical substances found in thou
-
sands of commercial products. Specific characteristics of each product 
determine whether exposure will produce systemic toxicity, local toxicity, 
both, or neither. Nevertheless, aspiration of even small amounts of certain 
hydrocarbons can lead to serious, potentially life- threatening toxicity.
Pathophysiology
. 
The most important manifestation of hydrocar
-
bon toxicity is 
aspiration pneumonitis
 through inactivation of the type 
II pneumocytes and resulting in surfactant deficiency (see 
Chapter 
446
). Aspiration usually occurs during coughing and gagging at the 
time of ingestion or vomiting after the attempted ingestion of an ali
-
phatic hydrocarbon. The propensity of a hydrocarbon to cause aspira
-
tion pneumonitis is inversely proportional to its viscosity and directly 
proportional to its volatility. Compounds with low viscosity and high 
volatility, such as mineral spirits, naphtha, kerosene, gasoline, and 
lamp oil, spread rapidly across surfaces and cover large areas of the 
lungs when aspirated. Only small quantities (<1 mL) of such chemicals 
need be aspirated to produce significant injury. Pneumonitis does not 
result from dermal absorption of hydrocarbons or from ingestion in 
the absence of aspiration. Gasoline and kerosene are poorly absorbed, 
but they often cause considerable irritation of the GI mucosa as they 
pass through the intestines.
Certain hydrocarbons have unique toxicities and can cause symp
-
toms after ingestion, inhalation, or dermal exposures. Several chlo
-
rinated solvents, most notably carbon tetrachloride, can produce 
hepatic toxicity. 
Methylene chloride
, found in some paint removers, 
is metabolized to carbon monoxide. 
Benzene
 is known to cause can
-
cer, most often acute myelogenous leukemia, after long- term expo
-
sure. Nitrobenzene, aniline, and related compounds can produce 
methemoglobinemia. A number of 
volatile
 hydrocarbons, including 
toluene, propellants, refrigerants, and volatile nitrites, are frequently 
abused by inhalation. Some of these substances, principally the 
halogenated
 hydrocarbons (which contain a chlorine, bromine, or 
fluorine), can sensitize the myocardium to the effects of endogenous 
catecholamines. This can result in dysrhythmias and “sudden sniff
-
ing death.” Chronic abuse of these agents can lead to cerebral atrophy, 
neuropsychologic changes, peripheral neuropathy, and kidney disease 
(see 
Chapter 157
).
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Transient,	mild	CNS	
depression is common after hydrocarbon ingestion or inhalation. 
Aspiration is characterized by coughing, which usually is the first clini
-
cal finding. Chest radiographs may initially be normal, but they often 
show abnormalities within 6 hours of exposure in patients who have 
aspirated. Respiratory symptoms can remain mild or progress rapidly 
to ARDS and respiratory failure. Fever and leukocytosis are common 
accompanying signs in patients with pneumonitis and do not neces
-
sarily imply bacterial superinfection. Chest radiographs can remain 
abnormal long after the patient returns to their clinical baseline. Pneu
-
matoceles can appear on the chest radiograph 2- 3 weeks after exposure.
After inhalational exposures to halogenated hydrocarbons, patients 
can present with ventricular dysrhythmias, often refractory to conven
-
tional management. Recurrent inhalation of the aromatic hydrocarbon 
toluene
 can lead to a type IV renal tubular acidosis.
 
Treatment
. 
Emesis and lavage are contraindicated given the risk of 
aspiration
. Activated charcoal is not useful because it does not bind the 
common hydrocarbons and can also induce vomiting. If hydrocarbon- 
induced pneumonitis develops, respiratory treatment is supportive 
(see 
Chapter 446
). Neither corticosteroids nor prophylactic antibiotics 
have shown any clear benefit. Standard mechanical ventilation, high- 
frequency ventilation, and ECMO have all been used to manage the 
respiratory failure and ARDS associated with severe hydrocarbon- 
induced pneumonitis.
Patients with dysrhythmias in the setting of halogenated hydrocar
-
bon inhalation should be treated with 
β
 blockers (usually esmolol) 
to block the effects of endogenous catecholamines on the sensitized 
myocardium.
 
Toxic Alcohols
Methanol
 is found in windshield washer fluids, deicers, paint remov
-
ers, fuel additives, liquid fuel canisters, and industrial solvents. 
Ethyl
-
ene glycol
 is found in antifreeze. Unintentional ingestion is the most 
common exposure in children, and small- volume ingestions of con
-
centrated products can theoretically cause toxicity. The pathophysi
-
ology, acid- base derangements, and treatment of both chemicals are 
similar, although they differ in their primary end- organ toxicity. In 
both cases the metabolites of the parent compounds are responsible for 
the serious clinical effects that can follow exposure.
Isopropyl alcohol
 (rubbing alcohol), found in hand sanitizers, 
causes intoxication similar to that associated with ethanol but can also 
cause a hemorrhagic gastritis and myocardial depression in massive 
ingestions. Unlike ethylene glycol and methanol, isopropyl alcohol is 
metabolized to a ketone and does not cause a metabolic acidosis. Man
-
agement is similar to that of ethanol ingestions (see 
Chapter 157
) and 
is not further discussed here.
Methanol
Pathophysiology
. 
Methanol is oxidized in the liver by alcohol dehy
-
drogenase to formaldehyde, which is further oxidized to formic acid by 
aldehyde	dehydrogenase.	Toxicity	is	caused	primarily	by	formic	acid,	
which inhibits mitochondrial respiration.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Drowsiness, mild inebri
-
ation, nausea, and vomiting develop early after methanol ingestion. The 
onset of serious effects, including profound metabolic acidosis and visual 
disturbances, is often delayed up to 12- 24 hours as methanol undergoes 
metabolism to its toxic metabolites. This metabolism is further slowed 
if 
ethanol
 has also been ingested, because the liver will preferentially 
metabolize ethanol. Visual disturbances include blurred or cloudy vision, 
constricted visual fields, decreased acuity, and the “feeling of being in 
a snowstorm” and appear only after acidosis is well established. These 
visual defects may be reversible if treated early, but untreated can lead 
to permanent blindness. On examination, dilated pupils, retinal edema, 
and optic disc hyperemia may be noted. Initially, patients have an ele
-
vated osmolar gap, then develop an anion gap metabolic acidosis as the 
parent compound is metabolized to formic acid.
In young children, determining if a significant exposure has occurred 
is usually difficult based on history. Methanol blood levels are available 
at some laboratories and should be sent after a concerning exposure. If 
methanol blood levels are not readily available, estimation of an osmo
-
lar gap may be used as a surrogate marker, but a normal osmolar gap 
does not rule out ingestion of any alcohol. Serum osmolality is mea
-
sured by the freezing- point depression method and compared with a 
calculated serum osmolarity.
 
Treatment
. 
Treatment	is	as	discussed	for	ethylene	glycol	toxicity.
 
Ethylene Glycol
Pathophysiology
. 
Ethylene glycol is oxidized by alcohol dehydro
-
genase in the liver to glycolaldehyde, which is further converted to 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
721
glycolic acid by aldehyde dehydrogenase. Glycolic acid is responsible 
for the metabolic acidosis and is further metabolized to glyoxylic and 
then to oxalic acid. Oxalic acid combines with serum and tissue cal
-
cium, forming calcium oxalate crystals that deposit throughout the 
body, especially in the renal parenchyma, leading to acute tubular 
necrosis.
 
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Early symptoms 
include nausea, vomiting, CNS depression, and inebriation. Delayed 
manifestations include an anion gap metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia, 
and acute kidney injury. Even later, patients can develop cranial nerve 
palsies.
Both ethylene glycol and methanol can produce profound, life- 
threatening metabolic acidosis and acidemia, with measured serum 
bicarbonates that may even be nondetectable. The onset of the acidosis 
is delayed up to 4- 12 hours after ethylene glycol ingestion and may be 
delayed further with any concomitant ingestion of ethanol. Ethylene 
glycol blood concentrations are technically difficult to perform and 
are available only at some larger reference laboratories. In the absence 
of readily available ethylene glycol concentrations, calculation of the 
osmolar gap may be helpful as a surrogate marker.
Examination of the urine with a Wood lamp is neither sensitive nor 
specific for ethylene glycol ingestion. The earliest sign on a urinaly
-
sis of ethylene glycol poisoning is usually hematuria. Calcium oxalate 
crystals can be seen on urine microscopy but might not be evident 
early after exposure. Electrolytes (including calcium), acid- base status, 
kidney function, and ECG should be closely monitored in poisoned 
patients.
 
Treatment
. 
Because methanol and ethylene glycol are rapidly 
absorbed, gastric decontamination is generally not of value. The clas
-
sic antidote for methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning was ethanol, a 
preferential substrate for alcohol dehydrogenase, thus preventing the 
metabolism of parent compounds to toxic metabolites. 
Fomepizole
, 
a potent competitive inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase, has almost 
entirely replaced ethanol because of its ease of administration, lack of 
CNS and metabolic effects, and overall excellent patient tolerability 
profile (see 
Table	94.8
). A serum concentration must be interpreted 
along with the time removed from exposure. A patient with a metha
-
nol level of 20 mg/dL 24 hours after exposure had a much larger dose 
than a patient with the same level only 1 hour after ingestion. Indi
-
cations for fomepizole include ethylene glycol or methanol level >20 
mg/dL (assuming no ethanol is present), history of potentially toxic 
ingestion (e.g., any intentional overdose), or history of ingestion with 
evidence of acidosis. There are few disadvantages to giving the initial 
dose of fomepizole to patients with a concerning history of ingestion 
or laboratory findings. Given the dosing schedule of fomepizole (every 
12 hours), this strategy buys the clinician time to confirm or exclude 
the diagnosis before giving a second dose. Adjunctive therapy includes 
folate (methanol toxicity), pyridoxine (ethylene glycol toxicity), and 
sodium bicarbonate infusion (if acidemic). If a child has had an unin
-
tentional exposure and the toxic alcohol level cannot be obtained, a 
reasonable approach is to follow serum chemistries every 4 hours until 
12 hours after the exposure. If the bicarbonate level on the chemistry 
panel does not fall in that period, a toxic exposure is unlikely (assum
-
ing no ethanol is present).
Hemodialysis
 effectively removes ethylene glycol, methanol, and 
their metabolites (except calcium oxalate) and corrects acid- base and 
electrolyte disturbances. Fomepizole should be given both before and 
immediately after dialysis. Indications for dialysis include a metha
-
nol or ethylene glycol level >50 mg/dL, acidosis, severe electrolyte 
disturbances, renal failure, and hemodynamic instability. However, 
in the absence of acidosis and kidney failure, even massive ethylene 
glycol ingestions have been managed without dialysis. Methanol, how
-
ever, because its elimination in the setting of alcohol dehydrogenase 
inhibition is prolonged, often warrants dialysis to remove the parent 
compound. Therapy (fomepizole and/or dialysis) should be continued 
until ethylene glycol and methanol levels are <20 mg/dL. Although 
the visual effects from methanol poisoning are usually permanent, 
the kidney injury from ethylene glycol injury is not. Patients requir
-
ing hemodialysis after ethylene glycol poisoning will almost always 
recover complete renal function within 2- 6 weeks. Consultation with a 
PCC, medical toxicologist, and nephrologist may be helpful in manag
-
ing toxic alcohol ingestions.
 
Plants
Exposure to plants, both inside the home and outside in backyards 
and fields, is one of the most common causes of unintentional poi
-
soning in children. Fortunately, most ingestions of plant parts (leaves, 
seeds, flowers) result in either no toxicity or mild, self- limiting 
effects. However, ingestion of certain plants can lead to serious toxic
-
ity (
Table	94.19
).
The potential toxicity of a particular plant is highly variable, depend
-
ing on the part of the plant involved (flowers are generally less toxic 
than the root or seed), the time of year, growing conditions, and the 
route of exposure. Assessment of the potential severity after an expo
-
sure is also complicated by the difficulty in properly identifying the 
plant. Many plants are known by several common names, which can 
vary among communities. PCCs have access to professionals who can 
assist in properly identifying plants. They also are well versed in the 
common poisonous plants in their service area and the seasons when 
they are more abundant. For these reasons, consultation with the local 
PCC may be very helpful in the management of these ingestions.
For potentially toxic plant ingestions, consider decontamination 
with activated charcoal in patients who present within 1- 2 hours of 
ingestion; otherwise, treatment is primarily supportive and based on 
symptoms. The most common manifestation of toxicity after plant 
ingestion is GI upset, which can be managed with antiemetics and fluid 
and electrolyte support. 
Table	94.19
 outlines management strategies for 
a few specific toxicities.
Herbal Remedies
Herbal remedies represent a relatively common exposure in children; 
despite this, reports of life- threatening toxicity are rare.
There are several mechanisms by which herbal remedies may be 
poisonous. Many herbal remedies are inherently toxic; it is either the 
dose used or specific processing of the remedy that renders them safe 
for use. For example, oil of wintergreen used as a liniment contains a 
high concentration of methyl salicylate, a concerning source of salicy
-
late poisoning in small children. A remedy intended to contain one 
compound may accidentally contain another; reports exist of contami
-
nation of skin creams with mercury, herbal remedies contaminated 
with lead, and weight loss supplements contaminated with cardioactive 
steroids. Herbal remedies may interfere with the metabolism of phar
-
maceuticals; an example is St. John’s wort, which by induction of the 
cytochrome oxidase system (specifically, CYP3A4) may render certain 
medications less effective.
Management of toxicity associated with herbal remedies remains 
largely the same as for other organic compounds. Decontamination 
with activated charcoal should be considered for patients arriving 
within 1- 2 hours of an ingestion. Signs and symptoms should be 
treated as outlined previously in this chapter, with excellent sup
-
portive care and therapy directed toward the suspected toxin. In 
the rare case of concern for contamination with a heavy metal, spe
-
cific assays may be obtained for confirmation of exposure. A list 
of herbal remedies and their associated toxicities are provided in 
Table	94.20
.
In limited cases, specific antidotes are suggested based on the 
pathophysiologic mechanism. Several plant and animal species 
contain cardioactive steroids with digoxin- like toxicity. Although 
digoxin- specific immune fragments are only evidence based for 
the management of yellow oleander 
(Thevetia peruviana)
 toxicity, 
it is reasonable to use this therapy in a critically ill patient who has 
developed cardiac toxicity or hyperkalemia after ingestion of lily 
of the valley, squill, or oleander. Several essential oils (pennyroyal 
oil, clove oil) deplete glutathione as part of their toxic mechanism, 
and thus treatment with NAC may be of benefit. Gingko causes a 
depletion of active pyridoxine stores, and thus pyridoxine adminis
-
tration may be helpful in the setting of benzodiazepine- refractory 
seizures.
 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

722 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Table 94.19 
 
  Commonly Ingested Plants with Significant Toxic Potential
PLANT
SYMPTOMS
MANAGEMENT
Autumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale)
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Initial leukocytosis followed by bone marrow 
failure
Multisystem organ failure
Activated charcoal decontamination
Aggressive fluid resuscitation and supportive 
care
Belladonna alkaloids: jimsonweed (Datura 
stramonium)
Belladonna (“deadly nightshade”; Atropa 
belladonna)
Anticholinergic toxidrome
Seizures
Supportive care, benzodiazepines
Consider physostigmine; only use if no 
 
conduction delays on ECG
Cardiac glycoside–containing plants 
 
(e.g., foxglove, lily of the valley, oleander, 
yellow oleander)
Nausea
Vomiting
Bradycardia
Dysrhythmias (AV block, ventricular ectopy)
Hyperkalemia
Digoxin- specific Fab fragments
Jequirity bean and other abrin- containing 
species (e.g., rosary pea, precatory bean)
Oral pain
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Shock
Hemolysis
Renal failure
Supportive care, including aggressive volume 
resuscitation and correction of electrolyte 
abnormalities
Monkshood (Aconitum species)
Numbness and tingling of lips/tongue
Vomiting
Bradycardia
Atropine for bradycardia
Supportive care
Oxalate- containing plants: Philodendron, 
Dieffenbachia, Colocasia (“elephant ear”)
Local tissue injury
Oral pain
Vomiting
Supportive care, pain control
Poison hemlock (Conium maculatum)
Vomiting
Agitation followed by CNS depression
Paralysis
Respiratory failure
Supportive care
Pokeweed
Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
Burning of mouth and throat
Supportive care
Rhododendron
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Bradycardia
Atropine for symptomatic bradycardia
Supportive care
Tobacco
Vomiting
Agitation
Diaphoresis
Fasciculations
Seizures
Supportive care
Water hemlock (Cicuta species)
Abdominal pain
Vomiting
Delirium
Seizures
Supportive care, including benzodiazepines for 
seizures
Yew (Taxus species)
GI symptoms
QRS widening
Hypotension
CV collapse
Supportive care
Atropine for bradycardia
Sodium bicarbonate does not appear to be 
effective
AV, Atrioventricular; CNS, central nervous system; CV, cardiovascular; ECG, electrocardiogram; Fab, fragment, antigen binding; GI, gastrointestinal.
Toxic Gases
Carbon Monoxide
Although many industrial and naturally occurring gases pose a health 
risk by inhalation, the most common gas involved in pediatric expo
-
sures is CO. CO is a colorless, odorless gas produced during the com
-
bustion of any carbon- containing fuel; the less efficient the combustion, 
the greater the amount of CO produced. Wood- burning stoves, kero
-
sene heaters, old furnaces, hot- water heaters, closed- space fires, and 
automobiles are a few of the potential sources of CO.
Pathophysiology
. 
CO binds to hemoglobin with an affinity 
>200 times that of oxygen, forming carboxyhemoglobin (HbCO). 
In doing so, CO displaces oxygen and creates a conformational 
change in hemoglobin that impairs the delivery of oxygen to the tis
-
sues, leading to tissue hypoxia. HbCO levels are not well correlated 
with clinical signs of toxicity, likely because CO interacts with mul
-
tiple proteins in addition to hemoglobin. CO binds to cytochrome 
oxidase, disrupting cellular respiration. CO displaces nitric oxide 
(NO) from proteins, allowing NO to bind with free radicals to form 
the toxic metabolite peroxynitrite, leading to lipid peroxidation 
 
and cellular damage. NO is also a potent vasodilator, in part 
responsible for clinical symptoms such as headache, syncope, and 
hypotension.
 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
723
Table 94.20 
 
  Clinical Toxicity of Selected Herbs
COMMON NAME
BOTANICAL NAME
THERAPEUTIC USES
POTENTIAL TOXICITY
Aconite (monkshood, 
wolfsbane)
Aconitum
 spp.
Sedative, analgesic, antihypertensive
Cardiac arrhythmias
Aloe
Aloe
 spp.
Burns, skin diseases
Nephritis, GI upset
Betel nut
Areca catechu
Mood elevation
Bronchoconstriction, oral cancers
Bloodroot
Sanguinaria canadensis
Emetic, cathartic, eczema
GI upset, vertigo, visual disturbances
Chaparral (greasewood)
Larrea tridentata
Aging, free radical scavenging
Hepatitis
Compound Q
Trichosanthes kirilowii
Anthelmintic, cathartic
Diarrhea, hypoglycemia, CNS toxicity
Dandelion
Taraxacum officinale
Diuretic, heartburn remedy
Anaphylaxis
Figwort (xuan shen)
Scrophularia
 spp.
Antiinflammatory, antibacterial
Cardiac stimulation
Ginseng
Panax quinquefolium
Antihypertensive, aphrodisiac, stimulant, 
mood elevation, digestive aid
Ginseng abuse syndrome
Goldenseal
Hydrastis canadensis
Digestive aid, mucolytic, antiinfective
Uterine, cardiac stimulation; GI upset, 
leukopenia
Hellebore
Veratrum
 spp.
Antihypertensive
Vomiting, bradycardia, hypotension
Hyssop
Hyssopus officinalis
Asthma, mucolytic
Seizures
Juniper
Juniperus communis
Hallucinogen
GI upset, seizures, renal injury, 
hypotension, bradycardia
Kava
Piper methysticum
Sedative
Inebriation
Kombucha
Stimulant
Metabolic acidosis, hepatotoxicity, death
Licorice
Glycyrrhiza
 spp.
Indigestion
Mineralocorticoid effects
Lily of the valley
Convallaria
 spp.
Cardiotonic
GI (nausea, vomiting), cardiac arrhythmias
Linn (willow)
Salix caprea
Purgative
Hemolysis with glucose- 6- phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency
Lobelia (Indian tobacco)
Lobelia
 spp.
Stimulant
Nicotine intoxication
Ma Huang
Ephedra sinica
Stimulant
Sympathetic crisis, especially with 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Mandrake
Mandragora officinarum
Hallucinogen
Anticholinergic syndrome
Mormon tea
Ephedra nevadensis
Stimulant, asthma, antipyretic
Hypertension, sympathomimetic
Nutmeg
Myristica fragrans
Hallucinogen, abortifacient
Hallucinations, GI upset
Oleander
Nerium oleander
Cardiac stimulant
Cardiac arrhythmias
Passionflower
Passiflora caeruliea
Hallucinogen
Hallucinations, seizures, hypotension
Periwinkle
Vinca
 spp.
Antiinflammatory, diabetes
Alopecia, seizures, hepatotoxicity
Pokeweed
Phytolacca
 spp.
Arthritis, chronic pain
GI upset, seizures, death
Sabah
Sauropus androgynus
Weight loss, vision
Pulmonary injury
Sage
Salvia
 spp.
CNS stimulant
Seizures
Snakeroot
Rauwolfia serpentina
Sedative, antihypertensive
Bradycardia, coma
Squill
Urginea maritima
Arthritis, cardiac stimulant
Seizures, arrhythmias, death
Thorn apple (jimsonweed)
Datura stramonium
Hallucinations
Anticholinergic
Tonka bean
Dipteryx odorata
Anticoagulant
Bleeding diathesis
Valerian root
Valeriana
 spp.
Sedative
Sedation, obtundation
Wild (squirting) cucumber
Ecballium elaterium
Constipation, antiinflammatory, 
rheumatic disease
Airway obstruction
Wormwood (mugwort)
Artemisia
 spp.
Stimulant, hallucinogen
Hallucinations, seizures, uterine 
stimulation
Yohimbine
Corynanthe yohimbe
Aphrodisiac, stimulant
Hypertension, sympathetic crisis
CNS, Central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal.
From Kingston RL, Foley C. Herbal, traditional, and alternative medicines. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds. 
Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning 
and Drug Overdose,
 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007, 
Table 68.1
, p. 1081.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

724 
Part VII 
u 
Emergency Medicine, Critical Care, and Anesthesia
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Early symptoms are 
nonspecific and include headache, malaise, nausea, and vomiting. 
These symptoms are often misdiagnosed as indicating flu or food 
poisoning. At higher exposure levels, patients can develop mental sta
-
tus changes, confusion, ataxia, syncope, tachycardia, and tachypnea. 
Severe poisoning is manifested by coma, seizures, myocardial isch
-
emia, acidosis, cardiovascular collapse, and potentially death. Physi
-
cal examination should focus on the cardiovascular and neurologic 
systems because these are the most detrimentally affected by CO. 
Emergency department evaluation should include arterial or venous 
blood gas analysis with HbCO determined by CO- oximetry, CK level 
in severely poisoned patients, pregnancy test, and ECG and troponin 
in any patient with cardiac symptoms.
 
Treatment
. 
Prevention of CO poisoning is paramount and 
should involve educational initiatives and the use of home CO 
detectors.	Treatment	of	CO	poisoning	focuses	on	the	administration	
of 100% oxygen to enhance elimination of CO. In ambient air the 
average	half-	life	of	HbCO	is	4-	6	hours.	This	is	dramatically	reduced	
to 60- 90 minutes by providing 100% oxygen at normal atmospheric 
pressures by non- rebreather face mask. Severely poisoned patients 
might benefit from 
hyperbaric oxygen (HBO)
, which decreases the 
half- life of HbCO to 20- 30 minutes and is thought also to decrease 
the risk of delayed neurologic sequelae. Although the clinical ben
-
efits and referral guidelines for HBO therapy remain controversial, 
frequently cited indications include syncope, coma, seizure, altered 
mental status, evidence of myocardial ischemia, HbCO level >25% 
(or >15% in pregnancy), and abnormal cerebellar examination. 
Consultation with a PCC, medical toxicologist, or HBO facility 
can assist clinicians in determining which patients could benefit 
from HBO therapy. Sequelae of CO poisoning include persistent 
and delayed cognitive and cerebellar effects. HBO advocates believe 
that the risk of such sequelae is minimized through the delivery of 
100% oxygen at 3 atm of pressure. Patients typically receive oxygen, 
by non- rebreather mask or hyperbaric chamber, for 6 hours.
 
Hydrogen Cyanide
Pathophysiology
. 
Cyanide inhibits cytochrome- 
c
 oxidase, part 
of the electron transport chain, interrupting cellular respiration and 
leading to profound tissue hypoxia. Patients may be exposed to hydro
-
gen cyanide (HCN) gas in the workplace (manufacturing of synthetic 
fibers, nitriles, and plastics) by smoke inhalation in a closed- space fire 
or by ingestion of cassava flour.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Onset of symptoms 
is rapid after significant exposure. Clinical manifestations of toxicity 
include headache, agitation/confusion, sudden loss of consciousness, 
tachycardia, cardiac dysrhythmias, and metabolic acidosis. Cyanide 
levels can be measured in whole blood but are not readily available at 
most institutions. A severe lactic acidosis (lactate >10 mmol/L) in fire 
victims suggests cyanide toxicity. Impaired oxygen extraction by tissues 
is implied by elevated mixed- venous oxyhemoglobin saturation, another 
laboratory finding suggesting cyanide toxicity.
 
Treatment
. 
Treatment	includes	removal	from	the	source	of	expo
-
sure, rapid administration of high concentrations of oxygen, and anti
-
dotal therapy.
Hydroxocobalamin
 is the preferred agent for use in known or sus
-
pected cyanide poisoning (see 
Table	94.8
). This antidote reacts with cya
-
nide to form the nontoxic cyanocobalamin (vitamin B
12
), which is then 
excreted in urine. Side effects of hydroxocobalamin include red discol
-
oration of the skin and urine, transient hypertension, and interference 
with colorimetric laboratory assays. Other FDA- approved treatments for 
cyanide poisoning include sodium nitrite and sodium thiosulfate, either 
alone or in combination. Sodium nitrite induces methemoglobinemia, 
which may exacerbate symptoms of carboxyhemoglobinemia and thus 
should be avoided in patients with smoke inhalation.
 
Miscellaneous Toxic Agents Found in the Home
Nicotine- Containing Products
Nicotine poisoning has become increasingly common with the recent 
advent of vaporizer (“vaping”) and e- cigarette devices (see 
Chapter 
157
). Although there are many nicotine- containing products (patches, 
gums, snuff, chewing tobacco, sprays, lozenges), tobacco cigarettes 
remain the main source of exposure. Prescription medications (var
-
enicline and cytisine) are available that are partial nicotine receptor 
agonists. For children, some of the most concerning exposures are 
from the bottles of liquid nicotine used to refill vaping and e- cigarette 
devices. These bottles typically do not have childproof caps and contain 
a large amount of concentrated nicotine.
Pathophysiology
. 
Nicotine acts on nicotinic ACh receptors in 
the nervous system, neuromuscular junctions, and adrenal medulla, 
stimulating neurotransmitter release. Nicotine’s effects on the dopami
-
nergic reward pathway play a significant role in its addictive properties. 
The effects of nicotine are dose dependent; at lower doses it primarily 
acts on the brain, causing stimulation. At higher doses, nicotine over
-
stimulates receptors, leading to inhibition and resulting in neuromus
-
cular and nervous system blockade.
Clinical and Laboratory Manifestations
. 
Clinical effects of nico
-
tine also depend on the dose. At low doses typically achieved through 
smoking, nicotine results in cognitive and mood enhancement, 
increased energy, and appetite suppression. Shortness of breath, cough, 
and fever may be seen with e- cigarette use–associated lung injury 
(EVALI), an inflammatory response in the lungs triggered by vaping. 
At higher doses, significant toxicity follows a biphasic pattern, where 
cholinergic stimulation symptoms predominate and are later followed 
by inhibition. The first signs of nicotine poisoning are nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea,	and	often	muscle	fasciculations.	Tachycardia	and	hypertension	
occur initially, although in severe poisoning these progress to bradycar
-
dia, hypotension, coma, and respiratory muscle failure, which typically 
leads to death if not treated. Serum and urinary levels of nicotine and 
its metabolite cotinine can be obtained, but these rarely are available in 
real time and therefore have little effect on diagnosis and management.
 
Treatment
. 
Treatment	of	nicotine	poisoning	focuses	on	maximiz
-
ing symptomatic and supportive care. Aggressive airway management 
should be the priority, especially in severe poisonings, because death 
usually occurs from respiratory muscle paralysis. IV fluids with escala
-
tion to vasopressors should be used for hypotension. Seizures should 
be managed with benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or propofol.
 
Single- Use Detergent Sacs
Commonly known as laundry “pods” for clothing, these products 
resemble candy to many children. When bitten into, a relatively 
large dose of concentrated detergent is expelled under pressure onto 
the posterior pharynx and vocal cords. This can lead to stridor and 
other signs of respiratory distress. Occasionally, and for unknown 
reasons, these children may also develop altered mental status. Sup
-
portive care with attention to any airway and breathing issues is war
-
ranted. Admission to the hospital is often indicated. Importantly, 
these are not considered caustic ingestions; the pH of these products 
is in the neutral zone. Upper GI endoscopy is rarely indicated. Curi
-
ously, laundry detergent ingested from a bottle is rarely of significant 
concern.
 
Electric Dishwasher Detergent
Especially when in the form of crystals, these products are highly alka
-
line (pH >13), and exposure by ingestion can cause significant burns to 
the vocal cords and GI tract. Admission for expectant management or 
upper GI endoscopy is usually indicated.
 
Magnets
Most foreign body ingestions pass through the GI tract once known 
to have passed into the stomach. However, ingestion of 
≥
2 magnets 
(unless very weak refrigerator- style magnets) cause concern for 
bowel obstruction and perforation (see 
Chapter 380
). Admission 
for attempted retrieval by endoscopy or clearance by WBI should be 
considered.
 
Batteries
Any disk or button- style battery lodged in the esophagus or airway 
should be considered a true emergency warranting immediate referral 
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 94
 u 
Poisoning 
725
to an endoscopist for removal (see 
Chapter 373
). These batteries can 
cause necrosis of the tissues in which they are lodged by continued 
electrical discharge and leaking of their contents (the former is likely 
the primary method of injury). Mucosal contact for even 2 hours might 
induce necrosis. Once past the lower esophageal sphincter, button or 
even larger batteries (e.g., AA, AAA) can usually be allowed to pass 
through the GI tract with close follow- up.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at 
eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com
 for Bibliography.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on 
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.